.. -*- encoding: utf-8 -*-

.. meta::
	:PG.Title: The Rāmāyana Volume 4 Uttara Kānda
	:PG.Id: 62496
	:PG.Rights: Public Domain
	:PG.Producer: James Simmons
	:PG.Credits: This file was produced from page images at the Internet Archive.
	:DC.Creator: Vālmiki
	:MARCREL.trl: Manmatha Nath Dutt
	:DC.Title: The Rāmāyana Volume 4 Uttara Kānda
	:DC.Language: en
	:DC.Created: 1894
	:coverpage: images/ramayana_cover.jpg

============
THE RĀMĀYANA
============

------------
UTTARAKĀNDAM
------------

.. clearpage::

.. pgheader::

.. clearpage::

.. topic:: Transcriber's Note

    This book was transcribed from two scans of the original found at the Internet Archive. 
    Words in italics in this etext were italicized in the original book. I 
    have corrected obvious misspellings but I've left variant spellings alone. Inconsistent
    spellings of names and incorrect punctuation have been fixed.
    
.. cleardoublepage::

.. container:: titlepage 

    .. container:: center x-large

    	THE 
    	
    	**RĀMĀYANA.**
 
    	.. vspace:: 2

    	TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PROSE FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT OF VALMIKI.
    	
    	UTTARAKĀNDAM.

    .. container:: center large

    	.. vspace:: 2

    	EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY

    	.. vspace:: 1

    	**MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M.A.**

 .. container:: center medium

    	.. vfill::

    	CALCUTTA
    	
    	1894
    	

.. cleardoublepage::

.. contents::
	:depth: 3
	:page-numbers:
	:backlinks: none

.. cleardoublepage::
   
.. mainmatter::

.. container:: center medium

    	.. vfill::

    	**To**

    	**His Highness**

    	SRI PATMANABHA DASA VYNCHI BALA SIR RAMA VARMA
    	
    	KULASEKHARA KIRITAPATI MANNEY SULTAN 
    	
    	MAHARAJA RAJA RAMRAJA BAHABUR SHAMSHIR JUNG
    	
    	KNIGHT GRAND COMMANDER OF MOST
    	
    	EMINENT ORDER OF THE STAR OF INDIA. 

    	**Maharaja of Travancore** 

    	THIS WORK IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED 
    	
    	BY 

    	**MANMATHA NATH DUTT.** 

    	*In testimony of his veneration for His Highness and in*
    	
    	*Grateful acknowledgement of the distinction conferred upon*
    	
    	*Him while in His Highness' capital, and the great pecuniary*
    	
    	*Help rendered by his Highness in publishing this work.*

.. cleardoublepage::
   
UTTARAKĀNDAM
------------

SECTION I. 
``````````

On the Rākshasas having been slain, all the ascetics, for 
the purpose of congratulating Rāghava, came to Rāma as 
he gained (back) his kingdom. Kauçika, and Yavakrita, and 
Gārgya, and Gālava, and Kanva—son unto 
Mādhālithi,—who dwelt in the east, (came thither); and the reverend 
Swastyāstreya, and Namuchi, and Pramuchi, and Agastya, and 
the worshipful Atri, and Sumukha, and Vimukha,—who dwelt 
in the south,—came in company with Agastya. [#]_ And 
Nrishadgu, and Kahashi, and Dhaumya, and that mighty 
sage—Kauçeya—who abode in the western quarter, came 
there accompanied by their disciples. And Vasishtha and 
Kaçyapa and Atri and Viçwamitra with Gautama and 
Jamadagni and Bharadwaja and also the seven sages, [#]_ who 
for aye resided in the northern quarter, (came there). And 
on arriving at the residence of Rāghava, those high-souled 
ones, resembling the fire in radiance, stopped at the gate, 
with the intention of communicating their arrival (to Rāma) 
through the warder. And that foremost of ascetics—the 
righteous Agastya—versed in various branches of learning 
and cognizant of the Vedas along with their 
branches,—addressed the warder, saying,—"Do thou say unto Daçaratha's 
son that we—the sages—have come (here)." Then at the 
words of Agastya, the gate-keeper quick [#]_ and swift presented 
himself with celerity before the high-souled Rāghava. And 
that one versed in polity and emotional expressions, of 
worthy ways, possessed of ability and endowed with patience, 
swiftly seeing Rāma resembling the full moon in brightness, 
communicated unto him the arrival of that supreme of 
saints—Agastya. Hearing of the arrival of the anchorets, 
possessed of the effulgence of the sun new-risen, he 
answered the warder, saying,—"Do thou usher them in, having 
regard to their comfort." And seeing the ascetics before 
him, Rāma with joined hands worshipped their feet 
with *arghyas*, and with regard consecrated a cow unto 
each, and saluting them with a collected mind, he ordered seats 
(for the saints). And having, according to their rank, seated 
themselves on gorgeous and superb seats of Kuça or 
deer-skins embroidered with gold, those foremost of sages—those 
mighty saints, versed in the Vedas,—along with their disciples 
and leaders, having (previously) been asked as to their welfare, 
addressed Rāma, saying,—"O son of Raghu. O mighty-armed 
one, complete welfare is ours. By good luck it is that we see 
thee fortunate, with all thy foes finished. By good luck it is 
that, O king, Rāvana—destroyer of creatures—hath been slain 
by thee. Sure, O Rāma, it was no great matter for thee (to slay) 
Rāvana along with his sons and grandsons. Furnished with 
thy bow, thou canst, without doubt, destroy the three worlds 
themselves. By good fortune it is, O Rāma, that Rāvana 
along with his sons and grandsons hath been slain by thee. 
By good fortune it is that to-day we see thee victorious 
along with Sitā, and, O righteous-souled one, with thy 
brother, Lakshmana, (ever) compassing thy profit. (By good 
fortune it is) that, O king, to-day we behold (thee) in 
company with thy mothers and thy brothers. By good 
fortune it is that those night-rangers, Prahasta, and Vikata, 
and Virupāksha, and Mahodara, and the unconquerable 
Akampana, have all been slain (by thee). By good fortune 
it is, O Rāma, that he than whose proportions there are no 
other's greater on earth,—even Kumbhakarna, was brought 
down (by thee). By good luck it is, O Rāma, that those 
highly powerful night-rangers. Triçiras and Atikāya and 
Devāntaka and Narāntaka, have been slain by thee. By 
good luck it is that thou hadst been encountered in a 
hand-to-hand combat with that foremost of Rākshasas, incapable 
of being slain by the celestials themselves; and achieved 
victory (ultimately). To defeat Rāvana in battle was (for thee) 
a small matter; but it is a piece of good fortune that 
Rāvana's son, who had confronted thee for combat, hath 
been slain (by thee) in battle. By good fortune it is that thou, 
O mighty-armed one, hadst been liberated from (the bonds 
of) that foe of the celestials whose course resembled that of 
Time [#]_;—and that thou also hadst secured victory. Hearing 
of the destruction of Indrajit, we congratulate thee (on thy 
success). He was incapable of being slain by all creatures, 
and in battle possessed mighty powers of illusion. Hearing 
that Indrajit slain, amazement hath seized us all. Having 
conferred on us this holy freedom from fear, O Kākutstha, 
O repressor of enemies, thou through good fortune, wilt 
grow in victory." Hearing the speech of the ascetics of 
sacred souls, Rāma, coming under the influence of a mighty 
wonder, said with joined hands,—"Ye worshipful ones, 
wherefore, passing by those exceedingly powerful ones 
Kumbhakarna and the night-ranger, Rāvana—do ye praise 
Rāvana's son? Wherefore, passing by Mahodara, and 
Prahasta, and the Rākshasa—Virupaksha—and Matta, and 
Unmatta, and the irrepressible Devāntaka and 
Narāntaka—redoubtable heroes all—do ye extoll Rāvana's son? And 
wherefore, passing by Atikāya and Triçiras and 
Dhumrāksha,—that night-ranger—all endowed with exceeding 
prowess,—do you extoll Rāvana's son? What was his prowess? And 
what his strength? And what his might? And by virtue of 
what cause did he surpass Rāvana? If I can well hear the 
same, (do ye tell it me). I by no means command you. If 
the thing can bear disclosure, I would hear it. Pray, 
speak out. How was Sakra vanquished by him, and how 
also did he obtain the boon? And how was the son 
powerful,—and not his sire—Rāvana? How could that Rākshasa, 
surpassing his sire, conquer Sakra in mighty encounter, 
and how did he obtain the boon? O foremost of anchorets, 
do thou to-day unfold all this unto me, who ask (for the 
same)." 

.. [#] The name of Agastya had before been just specified among the incomers; but so it is in the text.—T. 

.. [#] *Ursa Major*, or the great bear, the seven stars of which are the souls of as many saints,—Marichi, Atrai, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasistha.—T 

.. [#] *Turnam*—according to the commentator, is *mental celerity*, and *drutam—physical*. This distinction, however, is seldom, if ever, observed by Sanskrit authors.—T. 

.. [#] *i.e.* surpassing perception.—T. 

SECTION II. 
```````````

Hearing those words of his, the exceedingly energetic 
Kumbhayoni spoke as follows,—"Having regard to his 
(Indrajit's) energy and might, I shall relate unto thee the 
history of his race, in the light of which thou wilt perceive 
why Rāvana's son had been capable of slaying his enemies, 
but could not himself be slain by them. I shall, O Rāghava, 
describe unto thee Rāvana's race and birth, as well as the 
boon that had been conferred on him. 

"Formerly in the Krita age, O Rāma, there was a 
Brahmarshi—lord (of creatures)—son unto Prajāpati, and like 
unto the very self of the great-father. His virtues, springing 
from righteousness and excellency of character, are past all 
delineation; I can only say that, forsooth, he went by the 
name of Prajāpati's son. Verily on account of his being the 
son of Prajāpati, he was the darling of the deities; as by 
virtue of his spotless perfections, that magnanimous one was 
loved of all creatures. And on a religious mission that 
foremost of ascetics, repairing to the asylum of Trinavindu 
at the side of the mighty mountain, Meru, took up his abode 
there. And with his senses centered on the study of the 
Vedas, that righteous-souled one, going to the hermitage, 
carried on austerities; but his religious rites were disturbed 
by certain girls. And daughters of sages and Pannagas 
and those of Rājarshis,—as well as those of Apsarās, sporting, 
arrived at that quarter. And on account of every season 
being genial at that spot and also of the loveliness of 
the wood, the damsels, repairing to this place, ever 
disport there. And on account of the beauty of that region, 
those wenches, coming to where that twice-born one, Pulastya 
was, used to sing, to play on instruments, and to dance; 
and thus those blameless beauties disturbed the rites of that 
anchoret practising austerities. Thereat, the mighty ascetic, 
waxing wroth, said,—'She that comes within my kin, shall 
conceive.' Hearing the words of the high-souled one, (the 
damsels), afraid of a Brāhmana's curse, ceased to haunt that
place. But Trinavindu's daughter had not heard anything 
of all this; and, going to the asylum, she ranged it fearlessly. 
And she did not see there any of her associates come to that 
spot. And at that time that exceedingly energetic and 
mighty sage, Prajāpati's son, with his soul sanctified through 
asceticism, was engaged in the study of the Veda. And, 
hearing the sounds of Vaidika recitation, and seeing that 
storehouse of asceticism, she had her body turned pale, and 
signs of pregnancy displayed themselves. And, seeing that 
evil befall her, she was wrought up with anxiety; and, 
understanding matters, she said,—'What is this?' And, 
going to her father's hermitage, stayed there. And, seeing her 
in this condition, Trinavindu said,—'Wherefore is the person 
that thou bearest unlike what it used to be?' Thereat, in 
woe-begone guise, with joined hands, his daughter replied 
unto that one having asceticism for his riches,—'O father, 
cause know I none whereby I have come by this appearance. 
But, searching for my associates, I had ere this alone repaired 
to the noble asylum of the Maharshi Pulastya of a purified 
spirit. But associate found there I none, that had come 
thither. And seeing this change for the worse of my form, 
I from fear have come hither.' Thereat the Rajarshi, 
Trinavindu, having a live effulgence through asceticism, 
entered into contemplation, and saw the consequence of the 
sage's act. And coming to know that curse of the Maharshi 
of a purified spirit, he, taking his daughter, went to Pulastya 
and said,—'O worshipful one, O mighty sage, do thou accept 
this daughter of mine, adorned with her native perfections, 
who of herself hath come to thee as alms. [#]_ She will, 
without doubt, constantly tend thee, practising asceticism, 
and having thy senses fatigued.' When that virtuous (sage) 
had said this, the twice-born Rajarshi, desirous of accepting 
the girl (after due nuptial rites), said unto the 
former,—'Well!' Having given away his daughter, the king went 
(back) to his asylum; and the girl stayed there, gratifying 
her husband with her virtues. And that best of ascetics was 
gratified with her character and behavior. And well pleased 
(with her), that highly energetic one said,—'O thou of 
shapely hips, well-pleased am I with thee with thy wealth 
of worth, and therefore, O exalted one, I will to-day confer 
on thee a son like unto thyself, who will perpetuate both 
the lines [#]_—being celebrated as Paulastya. And as thou hadst 
heard the Veda recited by me, so, without doubt, he shall be 
named *Viçravā*.' [#]_ Thus addressed, that noble damsel with 
her soul wrought up with delight, in a short time brought 
forth her son *Viçravā* famed over the three worlds and 
furnished with virtue and fame; versed in the Vedas, of an 
impartial spirit, and ever engaged in observing vows. And 
the ascetic, *Viçravā*, was furnished with asceticism even like 
his sire." 

.. [#] Compare Lear:—'Let your study be to content your lord who hath received you at fortune's *alms*.'—Act I., Scene I., lines 67—69.

.. [#] *i.e.* maternal and paternal lines.

.. [#] From the root, *Sru—to hear*. 

SECTION III. 
````````````

"And Pulastya's son—that prime of ascetics—Viçravā—in a short 
time was engaged in asceticism like his father. 
And he was truthful, and of excellent character and controlled 
senses; was ever engaged in the study of the Vedas; and was 
of a sanctified spirit; and he was not addicted to any of the 
pleasures of life, and was always studious of religion. 
Learning of his ways, that mighty ascetic, Bharadwāja, gave 
unto Viçravā for his wife, his own daughter, Devavarnini. 
And having religiously wed Bharadwāja's daughter, that 
foremost of ascetics, Viçravā, conceiving the highest delight, 
began to reflect on the welfare of his offspring with an 
intelligence concentrated on them. And on her that one 
cognizant of righteousness begot a child, exceedingly 
wonderful, endowed with energy, and adorned with all Brahmā [#]_ 
qualities. On his having been born, his grand-father was 
rejoiced, and, marking the profitable intelligence (of the boy, 
he thought that) he would be the lord of riches. And 
well-pleased, (Pulastya) in company with the Devarshis 
(thought),—'Inasmuch as this is Viçravā's offspring, and as he 
resembles Viçravā himself, so he should be known by the 
name of Vaiçravana. And then the exceedingly energetic 
Vaiçravana, repairing to the wood of asceticism, increased 
(in power) like unto a fire fed by sacrificial oblations. And 
as he was staying in the hermitage, that high-souled one 
thought,—'I shall practise prime righteousness: verily virtue 
is the supreme way.' And for a thousand years, he, having 
his senses controlled, practised rigid austerities in that 
mighty forest, observing (all the while) the most rigorous 
restrictions. And on a thousand years having been numbered, 
he by turns observed the rules relative to each term; (at 
first) living on water, (then) on air, and (last) going 
absolutely without any fare. Thus passed away a thousand years 
like one. And then the highly energetic Brahmā along 
with Indra and the celestials, coming to that asylum, addressed 
(Vaiçravana), saying,—'O child, I am well-pleased with 
thee for this act of thine, O thou of excellent vows. Do thou, 
good betide thee, ask for the boon (that thou wouldst have), 
for, O magnanimous one, thou art worthy of a boon. 9 Then 
Vaiçravana said unto the great-father, who was 
present,—'O reverend one, I crave for the power of maintaining and 
protecting people.' Thereat, Brahmā along with the deities 
gladly said in a gratified spirit,—'Very well! I am about 
to create the fourth of the Protectors of creatures—Yama, 
Indra and Varuna,—the position which is sought for by thee. 
Do thou, O thou cognizant of righteousness, attain the same; 
do thou receive the position of the lord of riches. Thou 
shalt be the fourth among Sakra, the lord of waters, etc. 
And do thou take for thy vehicle this car, named Pushpaka, 
resembling the Sun himself, and thus raise thyself to an 
equality with the celestials. Good betide thee! We shall 
(now) go whither we had come, having, my child, done my 
duty and bestowed on thee the couple of boons.' Having 
said this, Brahmā along with the celestials went to his own 
quarters. On the deities with Brahmā at their head, having 
departed for the heavenly regions, the self-possessed lord 
of wealth of subdued senses with joined hands spoke 
unto his sire, saying,—'O reverend one, I have received 
the wished-for boon from the great-father, but the exalted 
lord of creatures hath not fixed any abode for me. Therefore, 
O lord, do thou seek out some dwelling for me, where no 
creature whatever can come by misfortune.' Thus accosted 
by his son, that best of ascetics, Viçravā, spoke, O righteous 
one,—'Listen! O excellent one. On the shore of the 
Southern sea there is a mount named Trikuta. On its brow 
is a beautiful and broad city built by Viçwakarmā, named 
Lankā, resembling the city itself of Indra the great, designed 
for the abode of Rākshasas,—like unto the Amaravati of 
Indra. There in Lankā, do thou, forsooth, reside. That 
romantic city is surrounded with a golden wall and a moat, 
and is furnished with engines and weapons; and hath 
gateways of gold and lapises. Formerly she was renounced by the 
Rākshasas afflicted with the fear of Vishnu; and was empty 
of swarms of Rakshas, who had gone to the nethermost 
regions. Now Lankā is vacant,—and there is no one that 
lords it over her. Do thou, my child, for abode, at thine ease 
repair thither. Thy stay there shall meet with no rub, and 
no manner of disturbance shall occur there.' Hearing the 
righteous speech of his sire, that virtuous-souled one along 
with thousands of delighted and joyous Rākshasas, began to 
reside in Lankā stationed on the top of the mount. In a 
short time (Lankā), through his sway, abounded (in wealth). 
And that foremost of Nairitas, the righteous son of Viçravā, 
well-pleased, abode in Lankā having the Ocean for her 
entrenchment. At times the righteous-souled lord of riches, 
mounted on Pushpaka, in humble guise visited his father and 
mother. And hymned by hosts of deities and Gandharvas, 
having his mansion graced with the dancing of Apsarās, and 
floating on rays like the sun himself, that ruler of riches 
went to his sire." 

.. [#] Such as self-control, asceticism, purity, etc. 

SECTION IV. 
```````````

Hearing the words uttered by Agastya, Rāma 
wondered as to how formerly Rākshasas were generated 
in Lankā. And then shaking his head, he, struck with 
wonder, momentarily eying Agastya, addressed Agastya 
resembling fire, saying,—"O worshipful one, hearing thy 
words that formerly Lankā had been in the possession of the 
flesh-eaters, I have been seized with great amazement. We 
had heard that the Rākshasas had sprung in the race of 
Pulastya. But now thou hast said that they owe their origin 
to a different source. But were they more powerful than 
Rāvana and Kumbhakarna and Prahasta and Vikata and the 
sons of Rāvana? Who was their progenitor? And what was 
the name of that one of terrific strength? And through what 
transgression were they driven out by Vishnu? All this, O 
sinless one, do thou tell me in detail, and do thou dispell my 
curiosity even as the sun dispells darkness." 

Hearing Rāghava's words, fair and fraught with polished 
phrase and period, Agastya, struck with surprise, said unto 
Rāghava,—"The lord of creatures sprung from water, first 
created water. And the lotus-born one generated creatures 
for protecting that element. And thereupon those creatures 
humbly presented themselves before the creator, 
saying,—'What shall we do? We are sore tried by hunger and thirst.' 
The lord of creatures, laughing, addressed them, 
saying,—'Ye men, do ye carefully guard this (water).' Thereat some 
said 'Rakshāma,' [#]_ and others 'Yakshāma.' [#]_ Thus accosted 
by those afflicted with hunger and thirst, the creator 
said,—'Those among you who have said 'Rakshāma,' shall be 
Rākshasas; and those among you who have said ‘Yakshāma,’ 
shall be Yakshas. And there sprang the brothers—repressors 
of foes—Heti and Praheti—lords of Rākshasas, resembling 
Madhu Kaitava himself. Praheti, who was righteous, went 
to the wood of asceticism. And Heti exerted himself to the 
utmost to get himself wived. And that magnanimous one of 
immeasurable soul married the exceedingly terrific sister of 
Kāla, named Bhaya. [#]_ And on her Heti—foremost of 
Rākshasas and best of those having sons—begat a son, 
known as Vidyutkeça. And Heti’s son, the exceedingly 
energetic Vidyutkeça, possessed of the splendour of the sun, 
grew up even like a lotus in water. And when that 
night-ranger arrived at proper youth, his sire turned his attention 
towards his marriage. And that best of 
Rākshasas—Heti—in the interests of his son asked for the hand of Sandhyā’s 
daughter, like unto Sandhyā [#]_ herself in potency. Sandhyā, 
reflecting that she needs must have to be given away 
by her, bestowed her on Vidyutkeça, O Rāghava. 
Having obtained Sandhyā’s daughter, the night-ranger, 
Vidyutkeça, sports with her even as Maghavān doth with the 
daughter of Pulomā. And it came to pass that after a length 
of time, O Rāma, Sāla Katankatā was filled with child by 
Vidyutkeça, as the clouds are furnished with water by the 
Ocean. And then repairing to Mandara, the Rākshasi brought 
forth her child, having the splendour of rain-charged 
clouds; even as Gangā had delivered herself of the child 
begotten by Fire. [#]_ And having delivered herself of her 
offspring, she again became bent on disporting with 
Vidyutkeça. And then forsaking her son, she began to sport 
with her husband; and the child having sounds resembling 
the rumbling of clouds, was renounced (by his mother). And 
forsaken by them both, the infant furnished with the 
brightness of the autumnal sun, entering his clenched fist into his 
mouth, began to cry slowly. And it so fell that, journeying 
with Pārvati, Siva, riding his bull through the aerial regions, 
heard the sounds of weeping. And along with Umā, he 
saw the Rākshasa’s son, as he was crying. And sent by 
Pārvati, whose heart was moved by compassion, 
Bhava—destroyer of Tripurā—made that Rākshasa’s offspring attain 
the age of his mother, and conferred on him immortality. 
And for compassing Pārvati’s pleasure, Mahādeva, 
indestructible and undeteriorating, granted (the Rākshasa) the 
power of ranging the air. And, O son of the king, Umā also 
bestowed a boon: 'Henceforth the Rākshasis shall conceive 
in a day, bring forth (child) in a day, and the child shall in 
a day be furnished with the age of its mother.’ And then 
the great and magnanimous Sukeça, puffed up with the 
receipt of the boons, having obtained auspiciousness at the 
hands of the lord, Hara, began to range everywhere, even as 
Purandara did on having obtained heaven." 

.. [#] *i.e.* *We shall protect.*

.. [#] *We shall worship.* 

.. [#] *Fear.*

.. [#] The evening Twilight, spouse of the Sun.

.. [#] Maheçwara.

SECTION V.
``````````

"Seeing Sukeça righteous and furnished with the boon, 
a virtuous Gandharva, named Grāmani, of the effulgence of 
fire, who had a daughter, called Devavati, like unto a second 
Sri herself, famed over the three worlds, and endowed with 
beauty and youth,—bestowed her on Sukega as if he had 
bestowed the goddess of fortune of the Rakshas. And like an 
indigent person on obtaining wealth, Devavati, on obtaining 
her beloved husband, affluent in consequence of having 
received the boon, was (greatly) delighted. And in her 
company, that night-ranger appeared graceful, even as a 
mighly elephant sprung from Anjana [#]_ doth in the company 
of a she-elephant. In good time Sukeça, O Rāghava, begot 
(on her) three sons, resembling the three Fires, And that 
lord of Rākshasas begot (on her) three sons, resembling his 
three eyes—the Rākshasas Malyavān, Sumāli and that 
foremost of the strong—Māli; all resembling the three worlds 
possessing themselves in calmness; like unto the three Fires 
established; fierce like unto the three vinntras,—dreadful 
like three diseases springing respectively from morbid Air, 
Bile and Phlegm. [#]_ And the sons of Sukeça, having the 
energy of the three Fires, grew up like a disease which hath 
been disregarded. And learning that their father had 
received a boon by virtue of his power proceeding from 
asceticism, the brothers, firmly resolved, went to Meru for 
practising penances. And adopting rigid restrictions, the 
Rākshasas, O best of kings, entered upon austerities, terrible, 
and capable of arousing the fear of all beings. And 
practising penances rare on earth with truth and candour and 
self-control, they afflicted the three worlds with gods, Asuras 
and human beings. Then that lord—the four-faced 
one—stationed on a superb car, addressed Sukeça’s sons, 
saying,—'I am for conferring boons (on you).’ Knowing that Brahmā 
surrounded by Indra and the other celestials was ready to 
bestow boons, they, with joined hands, said, trembling like 
trees, ‘O god that hast been adored through asceticism, 
if thou dost intend to confer on us a boon, let us be 
invincible, capable of slaying foes, immortal, lordly, and ever 
devoted to each other.’ Thereat, saying ‘So be it,’ unto the 
sons of Sukeça, the lord Brahmā, (ever) cherishing Brāhmanas 
with affection, went to the Brahmā regions. O Rāma, having 
obtained the boons, those night-rangers, rendered intrepid 
in consequence of having the boon conferred on them, began 
to disturb celestials and Asuras. And like unto men abiding 
in hell, the celestials, Charanas and hosts of sages, being 
harassed (by Rakshasas), did not find any deliverer. And then, 
O foremost of the Raghus, the Rakshasas, assembled together, 
joyfully said unto the undeteriorating Viçwakarmā—prince 
of artists,—‘Thou by thy own energy art the architect of the 
great gods, endowed with energy and prowess and strength. 
Do thou, O magnanimous one, construct a fabric for us after 
our heart hard by Himavān, or Meru, or Mandara. And do 
thou erect a magnificent mansion for us resembling the 
mansion itself of Maheçwara.’ Thereat Viçwakarmā—the 
mighty-arm of the Rakshasas—spoke of a building like the 
Amarāvati of Sakra, ‘On the shore of the Southern sea is a 
mountain named Trikuta. A second also is there called 
Suvela, ye lords of Rākshasas. On the midmost peak of that 
mountain resembling clouds, inaccessible even to the 
fowls of the air, all the four quarters have been hewn with 
bones. [#]_ If I am desired by you, I can construct the city of 
Lankā (there), having an area of thirty Yojanas, and 
measuring an hundred in length; surrounded with a golden 
wall and furnished with golden gateways. In her do ye 
dwell, ye irrepressible ones, ye foremost of Rākshasas; even 
as do the celestials with Indra, approaching Amarāvati, 
And occupying the citadel of Lankā, backed by innumerable 
Rākshasas, ye will be invincible to foes and capable of 
destroying them.’ Hearing Viçwakarmā’s speech, those 
foremost of Rakshasas, accompanied by thousands of 
followers, went to the palace and set up in the same, having 
a strong wall and a moat, abounding in hundreds of golden 
edifices. And obtaining Lankā, the night-rangers, 
exceedingly delighted, began to dwell therein. At this time, O 
Rāghava, there lived at her pleasure a Gandharvi, named 
Narmadā. O son of Raghu, she had three daughters, 
resembling Sri, Hri, and Kirti in splendour. And albeit no 
Rākshasi herself, she, beginning with the eldest, gladly 
married to the Rākshasas her daughters having faces 
resembling the full moon. And under the influence of the 
star, Bhagadaivata, those three exalted daughters of a 
Gandharvi were respectively conferred by their mother on the 
three several Rākshasas of eminence. And having wedded, 
O Rāma, Sukeça's sons began to sport with their wives, like 
celestials sporting with Apsarās. Malyavān's beautiful spouse 
was named Sundari. On her he begot, do thou understand, 
whom;—Vajramusthi, and Virupāksha, and the 
Rākshasa—Burmukha,—and Suptaghna, and Yajnakopa, and Matta and 
Unmatta; and, O Rāma, there was also born a lovely 
daughter of Sundari, Analā. And Sumāli's wife, of face like 
the full Moon, named Ketumati, was dearer to him than his 
life itself. O mighty king, do thou, gradually, know the 
offspring that were begot by Sumāli on Ketumati,—Prahasta, 
and Kampana, and Vikata, and Kālikāmukha, and 
Dhumrāksha, and Danda, and the redoubtable Supārcwa, and 
Sanhrādi, and Praghasa, and the Rākshasa, Bhāsakarna, and 
Rākā, and Pashpotkatā, and Kaikasi of luminous smiles, 
and Kumbhinasi—these are known as the offspring of Sumāli. 
Māli had for wife a graceful Gandharvi, having eyes 
resembling lotus-petals, of a lovely look, and like unto the 
most magnificent Yakshi of them all. Do thou, O master, 
listen to me as I mention to thee, O Rāghava, the offspring that 
Sumāli's younger brother begat on her,—Anala, and Nila, 
and Sampāti. These night-rangers—sons unto Māli—were 
the courtiers of Bibhisana. And those three foremost of 
Rākshasas, accompanied by hundreds of 
sons—night-rangers all—elated on account of their measureless prowess, began 
to worry the sages and serpents and Yakshas, and celestials 
with Indra (at their head). And incapable of being confronted 
(in battle), these resembling Death himself in 
energy,—wondrous elated in consequence of the boon having been 
conferred on them, ranging the world like unto the Wind, 
were ever engaged in disturbing the sacrifices (of the sages)." 

.. [#] The designation of an elephant. 

.. [#] The entire edifice of Hindu Pathology is based on the three-fold division of the morbid humours into Air, Bile and Phlegm. This division, albeit it may appear crude and unscientific to Europeans, taken all, in all, wonderfully answers its purpose. The tact displayed by Hindu physicians in diagnosing diseases on this method is wonderful. From feeling the Pulse alone, a Hindu physician, getting at the predominance of one or more morbid humours of the system, can accurately ascertain a patient’s health. The infallibility with which predictions of death are generally made, attests the scientific soundness of the division in question, and renders superfluous any elaborate argument in its defense.—T. 

.. [#] Tanka—may also mean a hatchet or a sword.—T, 

SECTION VI. 
```````````

"Thus afflicted, the deities, sages, and ascetics, wrought 
up with fear, sought the protection of that god of 
gods—Maheçwara—creator and destroyer of the cosmos,—unborn, 
of an unmanifest form, the stay of all creatures, worthy of 
being adored,—and the supreme preceptor (of all). And 
coming to that enemy of Kāma [#]_ and foe of Tripurā—the 
three-eyed (Deity), the gods, with their voices faltering 
through fear, represented with joined hands,—'O reverend 
one, the creatures of the lord of creatures are being (sorely) 
troubled by the sons of Sukeça, given to harassing their 
foes,—swollen with insolence on account of the boon conferred 
on them by the great-father, Our asylums,—constituting 
our refuges,—have been divested of their power of granting 
shelter; and driving off the deities from the etherial regions, 
they are sporting there like the immortals. 'I am Vishnu!' 'I 
am Rudra!' 'I am the king of the celestials!' 'I am Yama!' 'I 
am Varuna!' 'I am the Moon!' 'I am the Sun!'—flattering 
themselves in this fashion, Māli and Sumāli and the 
Rākshasa—Malyavān—as well as those going before them, are 
annoying (the gods), breathing exhilaration of martial spirits. 
Therefore, god, it behoveth thee to liberate us from fear, 
who have been greatly tormented by it. Do thou, assuming 
thy terrific form, slay the thorns of the celestials." Thus 
addressed by the immortals in a body, that lord, Kaparddi 
of red-blue hue, reflecting that it would be wrong for him to 
destroy Sukeça (with his own hands), spoke unto the 
gods:—"I shall not slay them, ye gods; they are incapable of being 
slain by me. But I shall unfold unto you the way in which
they will be destroyed. Do ye, ye Maharshis, in the heat of 
this affair, seek the shelter of Vishnu. That lord will slay 
them." Thereat, saluting Maheçwara with the sounds of 
*Jaya*, (the celestials) afflicted with the fear of the 
night-rangers, presented themselves before Vishnu. And bowing 
down unto the god holding the conch, discus and mace, and 
paying him high homage, they, greatly flurried, addressed him 
about the sons of Sukeça, saying,—"O god, by virtue of the 
boon (that hath been bestowed on them), resembling the 
three fires, Sukeça's three sons, assailing us, have deprived 
us of our abode. There is a city named Lankā, stationed on 
the top of Trikuta, (extremely) difficult of entrance. Taking 
up their station at that place, the night-rangers in a body 
pursue us. Do thou, O slayer of Madhu, destroy them for our 
welfare. We have sought thy shelter. Become our refuge, 
O foremost of celestials. Do thou dedicate to Yama the 
lotuses of their faces, severed (in pieces) with thy discus. 
Save thee, we have none who can, while tormented with 
fright, inspire us with courage. Slay in encounter the elated 
Rākshasas along with their adherents; and even as the sun 
drieth up dew, do thou dispell this fear of ours." Thus 
accosted by the deities, that god of gods—Janārddana—who 
bringeth fear unto foes—cheering up the celestials, said unto 
them,—"I know the Rākshasa, Sukeça, as flushed with the 
boon bestowed by Içāna. And I also know his sons, of whom 
Malyavān is the eldest. Those worst of Rākshasas that have 
over-riden your dignity will I, wrought up with wrath, slay 
(in battle); therefore, ye gods, be of good cheer." Thus 
addressed by the mighty Vishnu, the gods, highly rejoiced, 
went to their respective quarters, extolling Janārdana. 

"And hearing of the activity of the celestials, the 
night-ranger—Malyavān—addressed his heroic brothers, 
saying,—'The immortals and sages, going to Sankara, spake these 
words, desirous of our destruction,—The terrific sons of 
Sukeça, puffed up, and swollen on account of their strength 
flowing from the boon, are crossing us at every step. We 
have been overpowered by the Rākshasas. And, O lord of 
creatures, from fear of those wicked-minded ones, we cannot 
remain in our own homes. Therefore, to do us good, do thou, 
O three-eyed one, destroy them; and, O best of consuming 
ones, do thou with thy roars, burn them up.—Thus addressed 
by the deities, the slayer of Andhaka, hearing their speech, 
said, shaking his head and hands,—Ye gods, Sukeça's sons 
are incapable of being slain by me in battle. But I shall tell 
you the means whereby they may be slain. Do ye seek the 
shelter of him who holdeth the discus and mace in his hands, 
and who is clad in a yellow attire,—of Janārdana, Hari, even 
of the auspicious Nārāyana.—Having received this counsel of 
Hara, they, rendering reverence unto that enemy of Kāma, 
came to the abode of Nārāyana and communicated everything 
unto him. Then Nārāyana spoke unto the celestials with 
Indra at their head,—I will slay those foes of the celestials. 
Ye gods, cast off all fear!—O foremost of Rākshasas, Hari 
promised unto the frightened celestials that he would slay 
us. Therefore do ye think as to what is fit. Hiranyakaçipu 
hath met with death (at the hands of Hari), as also other 
enemies of the immortals. And Namuchi and Kālanemi, and 
that foremost of heroes,—Sanhrāda—and Rādheya, and 
Vahumāyi, and the virtuous Lokapāla, and Yāmala, and 
Arjuna, and Hārdikya, and Sumbha and 
Niçumbhaka,—Asuras and Dānavas endowed with strength and possessed of 
terrific prowess—all these, who, having come to the field, had 
never been heard of as worsted, who had performed hundreds 
of sacrifices, who had been well skilled in illusion, who had 
been versed in every branch of knowledge, and who were 
the terrors of their foes—have by hundreds and by 
thousands been destroyed by Nārāyana. Learning this, it 
behoveth you to do what would conduce to the behoof of 
all. It is a sore task to defeat Nārāyana, who wisheth 
to slay us.' Thereat Sumāli and Māli, hearing the words 
of Mālyavān, said unto their eldest brother, like the 
Acwins addressing Vāsava,—'We have studied, performed 
sacrifices, practised charity, and obtained riches; and 
attaining long health and long life, we have established sterling 
righteousness in our path. And with arms plunging into the 
sea of celestials, we have conquered our unrivalled enemies. 
Therefore, we have no fear touching death. Even Nārāyana 
and Rudra, Sakra and Yama, ever fear to stay before us (in 
the field). And, O lord of Rākshasas, there is no occasion for 
Vishnu's displeasure of us. The mind of Vishnu hath wavered 
in consequence of the evil caused by the celestials. Therefore 
will we even avenge ourselves on the gods, from whom hath 
sprung this wrong.' Having taken counsel together, those 
powerful ones conciliated their forces. And proclaiming (their 
order) that preparations were to be made, all the foremost 
Nairitas sallied forth for battle, like unto those led by Jamva 
and Vritra. And, O Rāma, having thus taken counsel 
together, with all the preparations complete, those 
huge-bodied and redoubtable Rakshas marched forth for conflict, 
mounted on cars, and elephants, and horses resembling 
elephants, and mules, and kine, and camels, and purpoises, [#]_ 
and serpents, *makaras*, and tortoises, and fishes, and fowls 
resembling Garuda himself, lions and tigers and boars and 
*Srimaras* [#]_ and *Chāmaras*. [#]_ And puffed up with pride of 
prowess, the Rakshas march, leaving Lankā, and the enemies 
of the celestials went to the heavenly regions for battle. And 
perceiving the destruction of Lankā at hand, those deities 
that had taken up their quarters there, everywhere were struck 
with fear and felt their spirits depressed. And mounting 
the best of cars, the Rākshasas by hundreds and thousands 
with intent minds swiftly sallied forth for the celestial 
regions. And the deities (aforementioned) followed the tract 
of the Rākshasas. And at the command of Kāla, terrible 
evil omens foreshadowing the destruction of the 
Rākshasa-chiefs began to arise on the earth well as in the sky. The 
clouds showered down bones and hot blood. The oceans 
overleapt their continents; [#]_ and the mountains shook. And 
jackals of terrific forms, having voices resembling the 
roaring of clouds,—bursting out into a horse-laugh, began to 
emit cries frightfully. Creatures were one after another 
seen to drop down; and mighty swarms of vultures, with 
mouths belching forth flames, began to wheel over the 
Rākshasa, like unto Kāla himself. And blood-footed pigeons 
and Sārikās [#]_ darted off (around). And crows and two-legged 
cats began to cry in loud accents. But fast bound with 
the noose of Death, the Rākshasas, proud of their strength, 
disregarding these omens, march on, and do not stay their 
course,—Mālyavān and Sumāli possessed of prodigious 
strength, going before the Rākshasas, like flaming fires. And 
even as the gods take refuge under Dhata, the night-rangers 
take refuge under Malyavān resembling the mountain, 
Malyavān. And under the command of Māli, that host of 
Rākshasas, roaring like mighty clouds, inspired with the desire 
of victory, went to the celestial regions. And the lord 
Nārāyana, hearing of the preparations of the Rākshasas from 
a celestial messenger, set his heart on fight. And equipped 
with weapons and quivers, he mounted on Vinata's offspring. [#]_ 
And donning on his mail furnished with the effulgence of a 
thousand suns, fastening his spotless quivers filled with shafts, 
being engirt with his waist-band and bright falchion, and 
equipped with his conch, discus, mace, *Sārnga*, [#]_ sword, 
and other superior weapons, that lotus-eyed lord, seated on 
Vinata's offspring like a very mountain, set out speedily for 
compassing the destruction of the Rākshasas. And seated 
on Suparna's [#]_ back, the blue-brown Hari clad in yellow 
attire resembled a mass of clouds on the crest of the golden 
mountain, with lightning playing through it. And hymned 
by Siddhas and celestials and sages and mighty (semi-divine) 
serpents and Gandharvas and Yakhas, the enemy of the 
Asura hosts presented himself, bearing in his hands the discus, 
sword, that weapon—*Sārnga*—and the conch. And the 
Rākshasa-hosts, struck by the wind produced by the wings 
of Suparna, with their pennons swinging to and fro and their 
weapons scattered about, quaked like the blue summit of a 
mountain with its crags tossed about. Then the night-rangers, 
hemming in Mādhava, [#]_ began to pierce him with thousands of 
excellent sharpened weapons dyed in flesh and blood, and 
resembling the fire of Doomsday." 

.. [#] The Hindu Cupid. Mahādeva had burnt to ashes Kāma, when he had the fool-hardiness to disturb the contemplation of the former. By the way, Kālidāsa has reared his faery fabric, entitled *Kumāra Sambhava*, on the basis of this legend.—T. 

.. [#] How purpoises could be pressed into the service passes my conception, unless *Siçumāra* have any other meaning.—T. 

.. [#] Wilson gives the meanings: (i) 'a kind of animal' and (2) 'a young deer'.—T. 

.. [#] *Bos Grunniens.* 

.. [#] Used in the Shakesperean sense: *Vide Macbeth*.

.. [#] A species of harlot. 

.. [#] Garuda, Nārāyana's vehicle. 

.. [#] The bow of Vishnu is so named. 

.. [#] Lit. *fair-feathered*—a name of Garuda. 

.. [#] One of the many designations of Vishnu, 

SECTION VII. 
````````````

"And as clouds assail a mountain with showers, then 
the Rākshasas, representing clouds, setting up shouts, began 
to assail Nārāyana representing a mountain. And Vishnu of 
a bright brown-blue hue, being surrounded by the flower of 
the night-rangers with dark visages, resembled the mountain, 
Anjana, on which the clouds pour down. And as locusts 
(flood) a field, gnats (throng) about a flame, gad-flies (cluster) 
around a pot of honey, or *makaras* (range) the deep, so the 
shafts shot by the bows of the Rakhas, having (the energy of) 
the thunder-bolt and endowed with (the velocity of) the 
wind or thought, pierce Hari as if at the universal 
dissolution. And those mounted on cars (assailed him) with their 
cars, and those mounted on the backs of elephants (assailed 
him) with their elephants, and those riding horses (assailed 
him) with their horses, and the foot-soldiers attacked him, 
stationed in the sky; and the foremost of Rākshasas 
resembling mountains, by means of darts, *rishtis* and *tomaras*, 
suspended the respiration of Hari even as the *prānāyāma* [#]_ 
doth that of a twice-born one. On being sore tried by the 
night-rangers, like the great Ocean by the fishes (residing in 
it), that invincible one, taking his *Sārnga*, showered shafts 
among the Rākshasas. And with sharpened arrows 
resembling the thunder, and endowed with the velocity of the wind, 
shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, Vishnu cut off 
(Rākshasas) by hundreds and by thousands. And dashing 
away (the Rākshasa ranks) with his arrowy shower, even as 
the wind aroused dasheth away a downpour, that best of 
male beings blew his mighty conch—Pānchajanya. And 
winded by Hari with his utmost might, that water-sprung king 
of conchs, endowed with terrific blares, roared, as if afflicting 
the three worlds. And the sounds of that king of conchs struck 
terror into the Rākshasas, even as in a mighty forest a lion 
(strikes terror into the hearts of) elephants in rut. And 
thereat the horses could not keep their ground, and the 
elephants were reft of their temporal flow, and shorn of their 
virtue at the roars of the conch, heroes began to topple down 
from their cars. And dight with dainty feathered parts having 
heads, the shafts discharged from the *Sārnga*, resembling 
thunder-bolts, riving those Rakshas, entered the earth. And 
in that conflict, pierced by the arrows discharged from 
Nārāyana's arm, the Rākshasas began to drop to the ground 
like mountains struck with the thunder-bolt. And the wounds 
on the persons of the foes inflicted by the discus of Vishnu 
discharge blood in streams, like mountains discharging 
streams of red chalk. And the sounds of that king of 
conchs, as well as those of the *Sārnga*, combined with the 
roars emitted by Vishnu himself, swallowed up the roars of 
the Rākshasas. And Hari by means of his shafts cut off their 
necks, and arrows, and standards, and bows, and cars, 
and ensigns, and quivers. And like fierce rays streaming 
about from the sun, like torrents dashing from the ocean, like 
elephants coming down a mountain, or like showers 
descending from clouds, the shafts shot by Nārāyana pursue (the 
foes) by hundreds and by thousands. And even as an 
elephant pursueth a tiger, a tiger a wolf, a wolf a dog, a dog 
a cat, a cat a snake, or a snake a rat, so the mighty Vishnu 
pursueth the Rākshasa host; and others, (struck down by 
him), measure their lengths on the ground. Then, having 
despatched thousands of Rākshasas, the destroyer of Madhu blew 
his water-sprung (conch), even as the sovereign of the 
celestials filleth clouds (with rain). And agitated by the arrows of 
Nārāyana, with their senses bewildered by the blares of the 
conch, the broken Rākshasa forces made for Lankā. And on 
the Rākshasa army having been broken in consequence of the 
beating it got at the hands of Nārāyana, Sumāli with showers 
of shafts resisted Hari in the encounter; and as a mist 
envelopes the Sun, he enveloped him (with his arrows). 
Thereat, the Rākshasas again summoned up their fortitude. 
And fired with rage, that Rākshasa, inflated with insolence 
on account of his strength, setting up a tremendous roar, 
darted at his antagonist in the conflict, thereby seeming to 
revive the Rākshasas. And as an elephant flourishes its 
trunk, that Rākshasa, lifting up his arm adorned with 
ornaments, began to roar from rapture, like a mass of clouds 
lighted up with lightning. And (Vishnu) cut off the head 
flaming with ear-rings of the charioteer of the shouting 
Sumāli; and thereat the horses of that Rākshasa aimlessly 
strayed hither and thither. And with his bewildered steeds 
Sumāli wanders like a person deprived of patience, whose 
senses are under a hallucination. And on Sumāli's car being 
drawn at random by his steeds, Māli, taking his bow and 
equipped therewith, darted at Vishnu's car and assailed that 
mighty-armed one as he was descending on the field of fight. 
And like birds entering the Krauncha, [#]_ the arrows discharged 
from Māli's bow, graced with gold, hit Hari and entered 
(into his body). And thereat, as a person holding his senses 
under subjection is not thrown out of his mental balance, 
Vishnu, assailed in that encounter with thousands of arrows 
shot by Māli, was not disturbed ever so little. And then that 
creator of all beings, the reverend Gadādhara, [#]_ twanging his 
bow-string, showered vollies of shafts on Māli. And getting 
at Māli's body, the arrows furnished with the luminousness of 
lightning, drink his blood, like unto serpents drinking nectar. 
And baffling Māli, the holder of the conch, discus, and mace, 
brought down Māli's crown, standard, bow and steeds. And 
then that foremost of night-rangers, on being deprived of his 
car, sprang forward, mace in hand, even as a lion bounds up 
from the brow of a hillock. And he with his mace smote at 
the forehead of that lord of birds, even as the Destroyer had 
smitten Içāna, [#]_ or as Indra smiteth a mountain with his 
thunder-bolt. On being severely struck by Māli with his 
mace, Garuda, writhing in torments, moved the god away 
from the field of battle. On the god having been removed 
from the field by Māli as well as Garuda, there arose a mighty 
din of Rakshas roaring (in chorus). And hearing the 
cheers of the Rakshas, Indra's younger brother, the reverend 
Hari, sitting awry on that lord of birds, albeit moved off from 
the scene of conflict, waxing enraged, from a desire of slaying 
(Māli) hurled his disc at him. And thereat the disc, possessed 
of the splendour of the solar disc, and resembling the wheel [#]_ 
itself of Kāla, flooding all the heavens with radiance, brought 
down Māli's head to the ground. And that head of the lord 
of Rākshasas, terrific to behold, on being cut off (by Vishnu), 
vomitting blood, fell down before (the Rākshasas), as formerly 
Rāhu's head' had fallen. And then the deities experiencing 
excess of joy set up leonine cheers with might and main, 
crying,—'Excellent, O god.' Seeing Māli slain, Sumāli and 
Malyavān, burning in grief, fled precipitately towards 
Lankā along with their forces. And Garuda, being cheered, 
turned round, and growing enraged, as before drove the 
Rākshasas with the wind of his wings. And (some) with their 
lotus-faces cut by the discus, (some) with their chests crushed 
with the mace, (some) with their necks torn off by the plough, 
(some) with their heads riven by the club, and some hewn 
by the sword, and others pierced by arrows, the Rākshasas 
began to drop fast from the sky into the waters of the ocean. 
And as the thunder-bolt with lightning (riveth) a mighty 
mass of clouds, Nārāyana by means of the thunder-bolts of 
his arrows discharged from his bow, rived the night-rangers 
with their hair dishevelled and streaming (in the wind). And 
the forces having their umbrellas rent, their arms falling off, 
their goodly garments scattered, their entrails coming out and 
their eyes rolling,—became incapable of distinguishing their 
own party from that of the foe. And even like (the roars and 
the vehemence) displayed by elephants on being attacked 
by lions, the roars and the vehemence of the night-rangers 
and their elephants, sore assailed by the Primaeval Lion, [#]_ 
were equal. And driven by Hari's networks of arrows, and 
discharging (all the while) their own showers of shafts, those 
night-rangers resembling the clouds of doom, are driven like 
the veritable clouds of the universal dissolution drifted by 
the wind. And hewn in twain with swords, the foremost 
Rākshasas fell like unto hills (toppling headlong). And the 
Earth was seen to be (covered) with night-rangers resembling 
dark clouds, adorned with jewelled necklaces and 
ear-rings,—falling down,—as if covered with dark mountains dropping 
down." 

.. [#] The practice of regulating respiration and finally suspending the same. This is practised by the Yogis of India, who attribute wonderful virtues to it.—T. 

.. [#] The mountain so named. 

.. [#] Lit. *the holder of the mace*, a name of Vishnu. 

.. [#] There took place an encounter between Rudra and Yama in the Sweta forest, for the protection of Mārkandeya and a certain king. In this battle, Yama had smitten Rudra. This is narrated in the Purānas.—T. 

.. [#] The wheel of Kāla or Time, representing the Reaper consists, remarks Rāmānuja, of days, months, years, decades, centuries, aeons, *etc.*—T. 

.. [#] Vishnu as a *man-lion* had formerly taken the conceit out of Hiranyakaçipu—the Asura king—and slain him, to rid his devotee—Prahlāda—of his mortal foe in the form of a father.—T. 

SECTION VIII. 
`````````````

"On that host being sore pressed at its back by 
Padmanābha, [#]_ Mālyavān turned back even as the ocean doth on 
meeting with its shore. And with his eyes reddened, that 
night-ranger waxing wroth, shaking his head, addressed that prime 
of male persons—Padmanābha,—saying,—'O Nārāyana, thou 
art ignorant of the time-honored morality of Kshatriyas; and 
therefore like a base wight thou slayest us, desisting from 
fight and exercised with fear. O lord of the celestials, he 
that commits the crime of slaying one that desists from 
fight, cannot go to the celestial regions as the fruit of 
meritorious acts. If thou art bent upon battle, O holder of 
the conch, the discus and the mace, taking up my post (here), 
I shall see (thy strength). Do thou show (me) the same.' 
Seeing Mālyavān resembling the mountain, Mālyavān, stay, 
the powerful younger brother of the sovereign of the celestials 
spoke unto him,—'I have removed the fear of the deities, 
affrighted at you, by promising that I will make root and 
branch work with the Rākshasas; and that same promise I 
am now fulfilling. I should always lay down my life for 
serving the celestials; and you I will slay even if ye should 
go to the nethermost regions.' As that god of gods having 
eyes resembling red lotuses was speaking thus, the lord of 
Rākshasas in high wrath pierced his breast with a dart. And 
hurled by the hand of Mālyavān, the dart resonant with bells, 
appeared graceful on Hari's breast like lightning embosomed 
in clouds. Thereat drawing out the same dart, that one 
dear unto the Wielder of the Dart, [#]_ having eyes resembling 
red lotuses, aiming at Mālyavān, hurled it at him. Thereat 
the dart discharged by the hand of Govinda like unto the Dart 
discharged by the hand of Skanda, rushing towards the Rākshasa 
like a meteor coursing towards the Anjana mountain, 
descended on the spacious chest of the lord of Rākshasas 
decked with the weight of a chain, even as the thunder-clap 
bursts at the summit of a mountain. And on having his mail 
rent, Mālyavān was utterly deprived of his senses; but 
(anon) reposing for a while, he again stood like a moveless 
hill. Then taking up a javelin made of black iron girt with 
many a thorn, he furiously smote that deity on the chest. 
And that night-ranger delighting in battle, dealing a box at 
Vāsava's younger brother, moved away to a distance 
measuring a bow's length. And now there arose a mighty tumult 
in the sky of 'Excellent!' 'Excellent!' And having struck 
Vishnu, the Rākshasa also hit Garuda. Thereat Vinatā's son, 
growing enraged, drove the Rākshasas away with the wind 
of his wings, even as a lusty wind bloweth about sere leaves. 
And seeing his elder brother driven by the wind produced 
by the wing's of that bird, Sumāli along with his forces, made 
for Lankā. And pushed off by the violence of the wind of 
(Garuda's) wings, the Rākshasa Mālyavān also, joined by 
his own forces, departed for Lankā, covered with shame. 
Thus, O Rāma, O lotus-eyed one, (the Rākshasas) had 
innumerable warriors beaten down and their foremost leaders 
slain. And albeit inflated with pride, they, incapable of 
coping with Vishnu, leaving Lankā, went to the nether 
regions with their wives for dwelling there. O best of the 
Raghus, these Rākshasas of celebrated prowess, related to 
the race of Sālakantankatā, remained under the leadership 
of the Rākshasa Sumāli. All those exalted Rākshasas going 
under the name of Paulastya that had been headed by 
Sumāli, Malyavān and Māli, were stronger than Rāvana. No 
other than the god Nārāyana, holding the conch, the discus 
and the mace, could slay those Rākshasas—foes to the 
celestials and thorns in the side of the deities. And thou art 
that eternal god—the four armed Nārāyana,—the lord,
undeteriorating and unconquerable, sprung to exterminate Rākshasas. 
The creator of beings—that one ever cherishing those 
seeking his refuge—appeareth at times to compass the destruction 
of marauders, bringing the religion of people to rack and 
ruin. [#]_ Thus, O lord of men, to-day I have truly related unto 
thee at length the origin of the Rākshasas. Again, foremost 
of the Raghus, do thou understand the matchless birth and 
potency of Rāvana and his sons related in detail. And that 
powerful Rākshasa, Sumāli, afflicted with the fear of Vishnu, 
along with his sons and grand-sons for a long time ranged the 
nether regions, and the lord of riches resided in Lankā." 

.. [#] Lit. *the lotus-naveled*—a name of Vishnu. 

.. [#] A name of Kārtikeya—the celestial generalissimo. 

.. [#] This tallies wonderfully with the corresponding view given in the Bible. Great men appear in the fullness of time to bring about reforms in religion, when, as was the case before the birth of Christ, men have wandered farthest from the true path.—T 

SECTION IX. 
```````````

"After a while the Rākshasa named Sumāli, coming up 
from the nether regions, began to range all over the earth. 
And resembling dark clouds, that lord of Rākshasas decked 
in ear-rings of burnished gold, taking his daughter like unto 
Sree herself without her lotus, and wandering over the earth, 
saw the lord of riches journeying in his Pushpaka, going to 
see his sire—that lord, the son of Pulastya. And seeing 
that one resembling an immortal and like unto fire, 
journeying on, (Sumāli) struck with amazement, entered the nether 
regions from the earth. And that mighty-minded one 
reflected thus,—'By adopting what measure may the welfare 
of the Rākshasas be brought about, and how can we increase 
(in power)?' And that great-minded lord of Rākshasas, 
resembling dark clouds, decked in burnished ear-rings of 
gold, then began to reflect. And then the Raksha addressed 
his daughter, named Kaikasi, saying,—'O daughter, the time 
hath come when I should give thee away. Thy youth is about 
to be passed. (Kept back) by the fear of refusal, no suitor 
hath sought thee (up to this time). But desirous of acquiring 
religious merit, we are striving our best in thy interests. My 
daughter, thou art furnished with every perfection like unto 
Sree herself. The being father to a daughter is misery to 
every one that seeketh honor. O daughter, one doth not 
know who shall ask for one's daughter. Wherever may a 
daughter be conferred, a daughter stayeth, placing in 
uncertainty the three races [#]_ to which she is related. Do thou, 
my daughter, seek for thy husband that best and foremost of 
ascetics sprung in the line of Prajapati—Pulastya's 
son,—Viçrava, and of thyself accept him (for thy lord). And then, 
O daughter, even as is this lord of riches, so thou wilt, without 
doubt, have sons resembling the Sun himself in energy.' 
Hearing that speech of his, the daughter for the sake of the dignity 
of her sire, going to where Viçrava was practising penances, 
stood there. In the meanwhile, O Rāma, that twice-born 
one—Pulastya's son—was performing the Agnihotra, like the fourth 
Fire itself. And without minding that terrific time, (Kaikasi), 
having regard to the dignity of her sire, coming up before 
him, stood (there) hanging her head down towards his feet 
and throwing up the earth with her great foe. And seeing 
that one of shapely hips, having a face fair as the full Moon, 
(that exceedingly high-minded ascetic) flaming in energy 
accosted her thus,—'O gentle on, whose daughter art thou? 
And whence dost thou come hither? And what is thy 
errand? And for whom (dost thou come)? O beauteous 
(damsel), truly tell me this.' Thus addressed, the girl, 
with joined hands, said,—'O ascetic, thou art competent to 
get at my intent by virtue of thy own power. Yet, O 
Brahmarshi, know me as having come here at the mandate of 
my sire. My name is Kaikasi. The rest do thou read 
thyself.' And thereupon, the ascetic, entering into 
contemplation, said these words,—'O gentle lady, I have learnt the 
purpose that is in thy heart. O thou having the gait of a 
mad elephant, there reigns a powerful desire in thee for 
having offspring. Inasmuch as thou hast come to me at this 
fierce hour, hearken, thou amiable one, as to the kind of 
offspring that thou shalt bring forth. Thou shalt, O thou of 
graceful hips, bring forth terrible and grim-visaged Rākshasas 
delighting in frightful friends, and of cruel deeds.' Hearing 
his speech, she, bowing down, said,—'O reverend (ascetic), 
such sons of terrific ways seek I not from thee that followest 
the Veda. Therefore it behoveth thee to favor me.' On 
being thus besought by the girl, Viçrava—best of 
ascetics—again addressed Kaikasi, like the full Moon addressing 
Rohini, [#]_—'O fair-faced one, the son that thou bringest forth 
last, shall be like unto my line,—he shall, without doubt—be 
righteous-souled.' Having been thus accosted, the girl, O 
Rāma, after a length of time brought forth a very terrible and 
hideous offspring having the form of a Raksha,—having ten 
necks, furnished with large teeth, and resembling a heap of 
collyrium, with coppery lips, twenty arms, huge faces, and 
flaming hair. On his having been born, jackals with flaming 
mouths and other ferocious beasts began to gyrate on the 
left. And that god showered down blood; and the clouds 
uttered forth harsh sounds. And the Sun was deprived of his 
splendour; and meteors began to dart to the earth. And the 
earth shook; and the wind swept away violently. And that 
lord of streams—the ocean, which was calm before, became 
agitated. And his sire resembling his grand-father named 
him, (saying),—'As this one hath been born with ten necks, 
he shall be called Ten-necked.' After him was born 
Kumbhakarna endowed with prodigious strength, than whose 
proportions there are none other's on earth. Then was born 
she that, having a frightful visage, goeth under the name of 
Surpanakhā; the righteous Bibhishana is the youngest son of 
Kaikasi. On that one endowed with great strength having 
been born, blossoms were showered down from heaven; and 
celestial kettle-drums were sounded in the heavenly regions. 
And then there arose the sounds of 'Excellent!' 'Excellent!' 
And in that extensive forest those exceedingly energetic 
ones—Kumbhakarna and the Ten-necked one grew up,—and 
became the sources of anxiety to people. And Kumbhakarna, 
maddened to the height, devouring mighty saints devoted to 
religion, constantly ranged the triune world in a dissatisfied 
spirit. But the righteous Bibhishana, ever intent on piety, 
dwelt there, studying the Veda, restraining his fare, and 
controlling his senses. And it came to pass that after a 
length of time the god, Vaiçravana—lord of riches—came to 
see his sire, mounted on Pushpaka. Seeing him, the 
Rākshasi—Kaikasi—flaming up in energy, coming to the 
Ten-necked one, represented to him,—'O son, behold thy 
brother, Vaiçravana, enfolded in effulgence; and, albeit of 
equal fraternity, behold thee in this plight! Therefore, O 
Ten-necked one, O thou of measureless prowess, do thou so 
strive that thou also, my son, may be like Vaiçravana himself.
Hearing that speech of his mother, the powerful Ten-necked 
one was wrought up with exceeding great ill-will, and he vowed 
then,—'I truly promise unto thee that I will be equal to my 
brother (in energy), or excel him in it. Therefore do thou 
cast off this sorrow that is in thy heart.' And influenced by 
that passion, the Ten-necked one with his younger brother 
began to perform rigid acts, with his mind fixed on asceticism. 
'I must through austerities have my wish,' thus fixed and 
resolved, he for compassing his end, came to the sacred 
asylum of Gokarna. And there the Rākshasa of unrivalled 
prowess along with his younger brother carried on austerities 
and thus gratified that lord—the great-father. And beings 
gratified (with him), he conferred on him boons bringing on 
victory." 

.. [#] The races respectively of her father, mother and husband. 

.. [#] Hesperus. 

SECTION X. 
``````````

Then Rāma spoke unto the ascetic,—"O Brāhmana, how 
did those exceedingly mighty brothers carry on austerities 
in that forest; and what kind of penances were theirs?" 
Thereat there Agastya said unto Rāma of a complacent 
mind,—"The brothers severally observed the morality proper 
to each. And Kumbhakarna, putting forth his best energies, 
constantly abode in the path of righteousness. And 
remaining in the midst of five fires in summer, he practised austerities, 
and in the rainy season, soaked in water (poured down) by 
clouds, he sat in the heroic attitude. [#]_ And in winter he always 
remained in the water. Thus passed away ten thousand 
years of that one putting forth exertions in behalf of religion, 
and established in the path of honesty. And the virtuous 
Bibhishana, ever intent on virtue and pure of spirit, remained 
standing on one leg for five thousand years. And when he 
had completed (his term of restriction), swarms of Apsarās 
danced, and blossoms showered, and the deities hymned 
(him). And for five thousand years, he adored the Sun, and 
with his mind concentrated in the study of the Veda, remained 
with his head and hands raised up. In this wise Bibhishana 
like a deity in Nandana passed away ten thousand years, 
observing restrictions. And the Ten-necked one passed ten 
thousand years without fare. On a thousand years being 
complete, he offered his own head as a sacrifice to Fire. In 
this way he passed away nine thousand years; and nine of 
his heads entered into Fire. And as in the tenth year he 
intended to strike off his tenth head, the Great-father 
presented himself at that place. And well-pleased, the Great-father 
came there along with the celestials. 'O Ten-necked one,' 
said (the Great-father), 'I am well-pleased with thee. Do thou, 
O thou cognizant of righteousness, at once ask for the boon 
that thou wishest to have. What wish of thine shall I realize? 
Thy toil must not go for nothing.' Thereat, the Ten-necked 
one, bowing down his head unto the deity, said with a delighted 
heart,—his words faltering with ecstacy,—'O Reverend one, 
creatures have no other fear than (that of) death; and enemy 
there is none that is like unto death. Therefore immortality 
is even what I crave for.' Thus accosted, Brahmā spoke unto 
the Ten-necked one,—Thou canst not be immortal. Do thou 
therefore ask of me some other boon.' Thus addressed by the 
creator, Brahmā, the Ten-necked one, O Rāma, standing 
before him with joined hands, said,—'O lord of creatures, I 
would, O eternal one, be incapable of being slain by birds and 
serpents, Yakshas, Daityas, Dānavas and Rākshasas, and the 
deities; for, O thou that art worshipped by the immortals, 
anxiety I have none from any other beings. Indeed, I deem 
as straw creatures such as men *etc.*' Thus accosted by the 
Raksha—the Ten-necked one—that righteous-souled one, the 
Great-father, along with the celestials, said,—'O foremost of 
Rākshasas, what thou sayest shall come to pass.' Having, 
O Rāma, said this unto the Ten-necked one, the 
Great-father (again spoke),—'Hear! I, having been gratified, will 
confer on thee a fresh boon. O Rākshasa, O sinless one, 
those heads of thine which have been offered as sacrifices and 
which have sunk into the fire, shall again be thine. And, 
O placid one, I shall also confer on thee another boon difficult 
of being obtained,—The form that thou shalt wish to wear, 
shall instantly be thine. As soon as the Ten-necked Raksha 
had spoken thus, the heads that had been offered as sacrifices 
into the fire, rose up again. Having said this unto the 
Ten-necked one, the Great-sire of all creatures addressed 
Bibhishana, saying,—'O Bibhishana, gratified have I been by 
thee, whose intelligence is established in righteousness. 
Therefore, my child, O righteous-souled one, O thou of 
excellent vows, ask for the boon that thou wouldst have.' 
Thereat the virtuous Bibhishana spoke with joined 
hands,—'O reverend one, since the spiritual preceptor of all creatures 
himself (is pleased) with me,—I (deem myself) as furnished 
with every perfection, even as the Moon is environed with 
rays. If thou wilt bestow on me a boon with pleasure, then, 
thou of excellent vows, hear of the boon that I would have. 
May my mind remain fast fixed on righteousness, even when 
I shall happen to fall into high peril; and may I attain 
Brahmā knowledge without any instructions! And may every 
sense of mine sprung during the observance of particular 
modes of life, be in unison with righteousness,—so that I may 
practise the form of religion (in harmony with any particular 
mode of life!) O exceedingly noble one, this best of boons, 
is even what is sought for by me, for nothing in this world is 
incapable of being attained by those attached to 
righteousness.' Then the lord of creatures, being again delighted, 
spoke unto Bibhishana,—'As thou art virtuous, so all this shall 
come to pass on thy behalf. And inasmuch as in spite of thy 
having been born in the Rākshasa race, thy thoughts, O 
destroyer of enemies, do not originate in sin, I confer on thee 
immortality.' Having said this, he intended to grant boons 
unto Kumbhakarna. Thereat the celestials in a body 
represented to the lord of creatures with joined hands,—'On 
Kumbhakarna thou shouldst confer no boons, since thou 
knowest in what manner doth this wicked-minded one frighten 
people. And, O Brahman, seven Apsarās in Nandana, ten 
attendants of Mahendra, as well as sages and human beings, 
have been devoured by this one. Considering what this Rākshasa 
did when he had not obtained any boon whatever, if he obtain 
one now he shall eat up the three worlds. Do thou then, 
O lord having immeasurable prowess, pretending to give him a 
boon, give stupifaction (instead). Thereby the welfare of people 
would be secured, and the honor of this one too shall be 
maintained.' Thus addressed by the celestials, Brahmā, the 
Lotus-sprung one, pondered. The goddess, Saraswati, who was by his 
side was also agitated with anxiety. And remaining by him, 
Saraswati with joined hands observed,—‘O god, I have come 
here. What work shall I accomplish?’ And the lord of 
creatures, on having her, spake unto 'Saraswati,—‘O Vāni! [#]_ 
be thou the goddess of speech of this foremost of Rākshasas, [#]_ 
favorable unto the deities. Having said,—‘So be it,’ she 
entered (within Kumbhakarna’s throat); and Prajāpati 
said,—‘O Kumbhakarna, O mighty-armed one, do thou ask 
for the boon that thou wouldst have. Hearing those words, 
Kumbhakarna said,—‘O god of gods, my wish is that I may 
sleep for a good many years.’ Thereupon, saying,—‘So be it,’ 
Brahmā along with the celestials went away; and the goddess, 
Saraswati, also again left the Rākshasa. And on Brahmā 
accompanied by the deities going to the celestial regions, he 
was renounced by Saraswati, and then he regained his 
consciousness. And then the wicked-minded Kumbhakarna 
sorrowfully thought,—‘What is this speech that has to-day 
come out from my lips? Meseems I had then been stupified 
by the deities that had come.’ Having thus obtained the 
boons, the brothers endowed with flaming energy, going to the 
Sleshmātaka wood, began to dwell there peacefully." 

.. [#] Hindu Yogis practise various attitudes, which are favorable to the regulation of respiration.—T. 

.. [#] Lit. word, a designation of Saraswati. 

.. [#] i.e. preside over Kumbhakarna’s speech while asking for the boon,—and let him, through thy power, ask for such a gift as may turn out profitable to the gods.—T. 

SECTION XI. 
```````````

"Learning that these night-rangers had obtained boons, 
Sumāli with his followers, casting off fear, rose up from the 
nether regions. And wrought up with exceeding great wrath, 
the counsellors of that Raksha—Māricha and Prahasta and 
Virupāksha and Mahodara—also rose up. And accompanied 
by his counsellors—foremost of Rākshasas—Sumāli presenting 
himself before the Ten-necked one and embracing him, 
addressed him, saying,—‘By good fortune it is, O child, that through 
thee we have had the wish that was in our heart, inasmuch 
as thou hast received the best of boons from him that is the 
foremost in all these three worlds. O mighty-armed one, that 
great fear arising from Vishnu, from which leaving Lankā, 
we had gone to the nethermost abysses, hath been removed. 
Full many a time, brought down by that fear, we, on being 
pursued (by our enemies), forsaking our homes, had gone to 
the nether regions along with all those (related to us). This 
Lankā was our city, inhabited by Rākshasas. (Now) it is 
inhabited by thy brother—the intelligent lord of riches. O 
mighty-armed one, if thou canst through self-control or charity 
or by a sudden display of prowess, repossess thyself of the 
same, a (great) thing shall have been achieved; and then, 
O child, thou shouldst, without doubt, be the lord of Lankā; 
and this Rākshasa race, which hath sunk, shall have been raised 
up by thee. And, O thou endowed with prodigious strength, 
thou shalt be the lord of all.’ Then the Ten-necked one 
addressed his maternal grand-father, who was present, 
saying,—‘The lord of riches is our superior; therefore thou ought 
not to speak thus.’ On that dignified Rākshasa-chief having
through moderation thus passed it by, that Raksha, 
understanding his intent, did not then say anything more. And 
it came to pass that when Rāvana had resided there for 
a time, Prahasta addressed him in a humble speech,—'O 
Ten-necked one, O long-armed (hero), it doth not behove thee 
to speak thus. Fraternal feeling there is none among heroes. 
Listen to these words of mine! There were two 
sisters—Aditi and Diti. And mutually attached to each other, those 
(damsels) endowed with surpassing beauty, became the wives 
of that lord of creatures—Kaçyapa. And Aditi brought forth 
the gods,—who are the lords of the three worlds. And 
Diti gave birth to the Daityas,—offspring of Kaçyapa. O 
thou cognizant of righteousness, formerly this earth, O hero, 
having the ocean for her garment, and furnished with 
mountains, belonged to the Daityas; and (gradually) they 
grew very powerful. And then this undeteriorating triune 
world was brought under the dominion of the celestials. So 
that thou art not the only one that would act inimically (to 
thy brother); but this course had formerly been pursued by 
both the celestials and the Asuras. Therefore do thou act in 
conformity with my word.' Thus exhorted, the Ten-necked 
one, with a delighted heart, reflecting for a moment, said, 
‘Very well.' And wrought up with delight, the Ten-necked 
one endowed with prowess the very same day went to the 
forest, accompanied by the night-rangers. And arriving at 
Trikuta, that one skilled in speech—the night-ranger, 
Rāvana—sent Prahasta in the capacity of an ambassador: ‘O 
Prahasta, hie thee; and tell the foremost of Nairitas—the lord 
of riches—in my words informed with mildness,—This city
of Lankā, O king, belongs to the high-souled Rakshasas; but 
thou hast established thyself in her. This, O sinless one, is 
not proper for thee. Therefore, O thou of unrivalled prowess, 
if thou shouldst render the same (back), I shall be highly 
gratified; and righteousness also thou wilt maintain.—’ 
Thereupon, repairing to Lankā, well-protected by the giver of riches, 
Prahasta communicated these words unto the highly generous 
ruler of riches,—‘O thou of excellent vows, I have been sent 
to thee by thy brother, the Ten-necked one, O long-armed 
one, O foremost of those versed in all branches of learning, 
do thou listen to my words, O lord of wealth,—and what the 
Ten-faced one says,—This beautiful city, O thou furnished 
with expansive eyes, was formerly inhabited by Rākshasas of 
dreadful prowess headed by Sumāli; and for that reason, O 
son of Viçrava, he asks thee this. Do thou, my child, grant 
this unto him, who is humbly begging for it.’—Hearing these 
words from Prahasta, the god Vaiçravana, best of those 
skilled in speech, answered the former, saying,—‘My father 
had given this unto me, when it had been emptied of 
night-rangers; and, O Raksha, I have inhabited this place, 
furnished with charity, honor, and other virtues. Go and tell 
the Ten-necked one, as this city and this kingdom are mine, 
so they are thine, O mighty-armed one. Do thou enjoy this 
kingdom without a foe. May my kingdom and wealth never 
undergo division when thou art present!’ Having said this, 
the lord of riches sought the side of his sire,—and, paying 
him reverence, he communicated Rāvana’s wish unto him: 
'My father, this Ten-necked one had sent a messenger to me, 
saying,—Give (back) the city of Lankā, which had before 
been inhabited by hosts of Rakshas.—Now, O thou of 
excellent vows, do thou tell me what I should do.’ Thus 
accosted, that foremost of ascetics, the 
Brahmarshi—Viçrava—spoke unto the lord of riches (standing) with joined 
hands,—‘O son, listen to my words. The mighty-armed Ten-necked 
one had (once) spoken in my presence (to that effect). 
Thereat I greatly rebuked that wicked-minded one; and I said 
again and again in anger,—Thou disregardest (thy religion 
and honor). Do thou listen to my words fraught with religion 
and profit. Of a wicked heart, thou, with thy understanding 
spoilt in consequence of the granting of the boon, canst 
not distinguish between those deserving honor and those not; 
and, further, through my curse, thou hast come by a fierce 
nature. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, go to the mountain, 
Kailaça. Do thou, along with thy retainers, for the purpose 
of dwelling there, take up thy quarters (there). There floweth 
the Mandākini—best of streams, with her water covered with 
golden lotuses resembling suns, as also with lilies and blue 
lotuses and various other fragrant flowers. And coming 
there frequently, celestials with Gandharvas and Apsarās and 
serpents and Kinnaras, ever sport there, O lord of riches, 
thou ought not to enter into hostilities with that Raksha. 
Thou knowest how he hath obtained a great boon.' Thus 
addressed, Viçravana, for the sake of his father's dignity, with 
his wives and sons, with his counsellors and his vehicles 
and wealth went (to Kailaça). And Prahasta, going (back), 
joyfully spoke unto the high-souled Ten-necked one, (seated) 
with his counsellors and his younger brothers,—'The city 
of Lankā is (now) empty. Renouncing her, the bestower of 
riches hath gone out of her. (Now) entering into her, along 
with us, do thou there maintain thine own religion.' Thus 
addressed by Prahasta, the redoubtable Ten-necked one 
entered the city of Lankā with his brothers and forces and 
followers. And then even as the lord of the celestials 
ascends heaven, that foe of the immortals ascended 
Lankā well-divided by highways,—which had been 
forsaken by the lord of wealth. And having been installed, 
that night-ranger—the Ten-faced one—dwelt in that city; and 
that city teemed with night-rangers resembling dark clouds. 
And the lord of riches, for the sake of his father's dignity, 
dwelt in a palace situated on the hill bright as moon-light, 
graced with ornamented superb piles; even as Purandara 
dwells in Amaravati." 

SECTION XII. 
````````````

"The lord of Rākshasas was installed along with his 
brothers. And then he thought of the giving away in 
marriage of his Rākshasi sister. Then that Rākshasa 
bestowed his sister, the Rākshasi Surpanakhā, on that lord of 
the Dānavas and king of the Kālakas—Vidyujjibha. And 
having given her away, the Raksha was wandering about for 
the purpose of hunting, when, Rāma, he happened to see 
Diti's son, named Maya. And seeing him accompanied by 
his daughter, that night-ranger—the Ten-necked one—asked 
him, saying,—'Who art thou that (wanderest) alone in 
this forest devoid of men as well as deer? And art thou 
accompanied by this one having the eyes of a young deer?' 
Thereat Maya, O Rāma, answered that night-ranger, when 
he had asked this,—'Listen. I shall tell thee all about this. 
Thou mayst ere this have heard of an Apsarā named Hemā. 
She like unto the Paulomi of Satakratu was bestowed on me 
by the gods. And I passed a thousand years, being devoted 
to her. Thirteen years have passed away since she had gone 
on a business of the celestials, as also the fourteenth year. 
Then I through my extraordinary skill constructed a golden 
palace, adorned with diamonds and lapises. There I dwelt, 
aggrieved and sorrowful on account of her separation. From 
thence, taking my daughter, I have come to this wood. This, 
O king, is my daughter, grown in her womb. I have come 
hither with her, seeking for her husband. Verily being father 
to a daughter is misery to every one that seeketh one's honour. 
A daughter, forsooth, stayeth, ever placing the two lines [#]_ 
in uncertainty. And on this wife of mine I have also begat 
two sons;—the first is Māyāvi and the next Dundubhi. Thus 
have I truly related everything unto thee that hadst asked for it. 
But, my child, how can I know thee now? Who art thou?'
Thus addressed, the Raksha humbly said,—Ten-necked by 
name, I am the son of the ascetic, Paulastya, who was born 
as the third son of Brahmā.' Thus accosted, O Rāma, by that 
lord of Rākshasas, that Dānava and foremost of Dānavas, 
Maya, learning that he was the son of the Maharshi, Paulastya, 
there desired in his heart to give away his daughter to him. 
And taking her hand with his own, Maya—lord of 
Daityas—laughing, said unto that lord of the Rlkshasas,—'This 
daughter of mine, O king, borne by the Apsarā, Hemā, this 
my daughter named Mandodari do thou accept as thy wife.' 
'Well' thereupon the Ten-necked answered him, O Rāma.
And lighting a fire, he took her hand. Maya, O Rāma, knew 
the curse of the sage touching him. [#]_ Knowing this, he gave 
away his daughter, having regard to the race of Rāvana's 
paternal grand-father; and he also conferred on him an 
exceedingly wonderful dart acquired through the most rigid 
austerities,—by which he wounded Lakshmana. Having thus 
wedded, that master—Lankā's lord—going (back) to that city, 
married his brothers. And Rāvana married the grand-daughter 
of Virochana (on the maternal side) named Vajrajwālā, to 
Kumbhakarna.—And Bibhishana obtained for his wife the 
righteous (damsel) named Saramā—daughter unto the 
high-souled—Sailusha—sovereign of the Gandharvas. (Saramā) 
was born on the shores of the lake, Mānasa. And while the 
lake, Mānasa, was swollen with water on the arrival of the 
rains, her mother, hearing her cries, affectionately 
said,—*Saromāvarddhata*—'O lake, do not swell,' and from this 
circumstance, her name became Saramā. Having thus 
wedded, those Rākshasas, taking each his wife, set about 
sporting there, like unto Gandharvas sporting in Nandana. 
And then was born Mandodari's son—Meghanāda. Him ye 
call Indrajit. As soon as he was born, Rāvana's son, formerly 
crying, emitted a tremendous roar resembling the rumbling 
of clouds. And, O Rāghava, Lankā was petrified at his 
voice; and (accordingly) his sire himself kept his name, 
Meghanāda. And, O Rāma, remaining hidden like a fire by 
fuel, Rāvana's son, rejoicing (the bosoms of) his father and 
mother, grew up in Rāvana's elegant inner apartments." 

.. [#] The lines, namely, of her father and mother. The line of a mother as distinct from that of a father would be impossible under the present economy of Hindu society inasmuch as, as soon as a girl is married, she by that ceremony leaves her father's line and becomes incorporated with that of her husband. But this seems to have been otherwise in ancient times. This opens up an interesting social problem for the research of orientalists.—T.

.. [#] Respecting his birth. 

SECTION XIII.
`````````````

"And once on a time it came to pass that, dispatched by 
the lord of creatures, Sleep in her (native) form powerfully 
overpowered Kumbhakarna. And then Kumbhakarna spoke 
unto his brother, who was seated,—'O king, Sleep obstructs 
me. Do thou, therefore, have my mansion made.' And, 
thereupon, employed by the king, architects resembling 
Viçwakarmā constructed an edifice beautiful to behold, 
measuring the smooth space of a Yojana diagonally and two in 
area; graceful to the view, and having no obstruction (to hide its 
beauty). And the Rākshasa caused a splendid and delightful 
pile to be built, adorned all round with pillars decked with 
gold and crystal,—having stairs composed of lapises, furnished 
with networks of small bells, set with ivory gateways, and 
containing daises dight with diamonds and crystal,—elegant 
throughout, and enduring,—like unto a goodly cave of 
Maru. And there, overcome with slumber, the wondrous 
strong Kumbhakarna, lying down for many thousand years, 
did not wake up. And while Kumbhakarna was overpowered 
by sleep, Daçānana [#]_ without let began to destroy Devarshis, 
Yakshas and Gandharvas,—and going to graceful gardens, 
Nandana, etc., he devastated them (ruthlessly). And that 
Rākshasa spread destruction, even as an elephant sporting 
agitates a river, as the wind bringeth down trees, or as the 
thunder-bolt riveth mountain-peaks. Hearing of the doings 
of Daçagriva, [#]_ and remembering his conduct chiming in 
with his race, the righteous lord of 
riches—Vaiçravana—showing his fraternal affection, despatched a messenger to 
Lankā, seeking the welfare of Daçagriva. And going to the 
city of Lankā, he presented himself before Bibhishana. And 
having received him with honor, he asked him as to the cause 
of his visit. And having enquired after the welfare of the king 
as well as his kindred, Bibhishana, showed him unto Daçānana 
seated in his court. And seeing the king there flaming in 
his own energy, he (the messenger), saluting him (Rāvana) 
with the word—*Jaya* [#]_—stood silent. And the envoy 
addressed Dacagriva seated on a superb couch, graced with a costly 
coverlet,—'O king, I shall tell thee all that thy brother hath 
said, worthy of both the character and race of your father and 
mother,—Enough of wrong-doing. Now thou shouldst mend 
thy ways. If thou canst, stay in righteousness. I have seen 
Nandana ravaged; and I have heard of the sages slain, and 
O king, of the preparations the deities are making against 
thee. I have been utterly disregarded by thee; but even if a 
boy should transgress, he should for all that be protected by 
his friends. Self-restrained and controlling my senses, I, 
adopting a terrific vow, had gone to the breast of the Himavān 
for practising righteousness. There I saw that lord of the gods 
in company with Umā. There I happened to cast my left eye 
on the goddess, for knowing, O mighty king, who she 
was,—and not for any other reason. Rudrāni was staying 
then, wearing a surpassing form. Thereupon through the 
divine energy of the goddess my left eye was burnt and 
seemed to be covered with dust, and its lustre became tawny. 
Then I, going to another spacious peak of the mountain, 
became engaged in silently observing a mighty vow. On 
my term of restraint having been complete, that lord of the 
gods—Maheçwara—with a gratified heart addressed me, 
saying,—O righteous one, O thou of fair vows, I am 
well-pleased with this asceticism of thine. I also had observed 
this vow; and thou also, O lord of riches, hast done the same, 
A third person there is none that practiseth such a vow. 
This vow is hard to perform, and formerly it was I that 
introduced it. Therefore, O mild one, O lord of riches, do 
thou contract friendship with me. And thou hast conquered 
me by thy penances. Therefore, O sinless one, be thou my 
friend. And this thy left eye hath been burnt through the 
energy of the goddess, and hath turned tawny in consequence 
of having seen the grace of the goddess; so thy name shall 
ever be Ekākshipingali.—Then at Sankara's command I have 
obtained the privilege of companionship (with him). Having 
come here I have heard of thy evil designs. Do thou then 
desist from this impious course, tending to sully thy line, 
The celestials along with the sages are pondering over the 
means of compassing thy death.—' Thus addressed, the 
Ten-necked one, with his eyes reddened in wrath, rubbing his 
hands and knashing his teeth, said,—'O messenger, I have 
learnt what thou hast uttered. Neither thou nor this brother 
of mine by whom thou hast been despatched, (shall live); 
nor doth the keeper of riches say what is for my good. And 
the fool makes me hear the circumstance of his having made 
friends with Maheçwara. I shall never forgive what thou 
hast said. Up to this I had borne him, considering that he, 
being my elder brother and as such my superior should not 
be slain by me. But now hearing his (utterances), even this 
is my resolve. Depending upon the might of my arms, I 
shall conquer the three worlds. On his account solely I 
shall on the instant despatch the four Lokapālas to the abode 
of Death.' Having said this, Lankā's lord killed the emissary 
with his sword and made him over to the wicked Rākshasas 
for being eaten. Then, having performed Swastyāyana, [#]_ 
Rāvana, ascending his car, went to where the lord of riches 
was, bent on conquering the three worlds." 

.. [#] Henceforth we shall use this significant surname of Rāvana, meaning *Ten-faced*. 

.. [#] Ten-necked. 

.. [#] *Jaya* may mean (1) victory and (2) all the deities of the Hindu pantheon.—T. 

.. [#] A religious ceremony performed for propitiating any deity or malign star, and so warding off an impending disaster, or bringing luck to any undertaking. This has obtained to this day in Hindu society.—T. 

SECTION XIV. 
````````````

"Accompanied by his six counsellors—Mahodara and 
Prahasta, Māricha, Suka and Sārana, and the heroic 
Dhumrāksha—eager for encounter—the graceful Rāvana, 
elated with his strength sallied out, as if consuming all 
creatures with his wrath. And leaving behind cities and 
streams and hills and woods and groves, he in a moment 
came to the mountain—Kailaça. And hearing that 
wicked-minded lord of Rākshasas, breathing high spirits, had arrived 
at the mount in company with his counsellors, the Yakshas 
could not stay before that Raksha,—and knowing 'This one 
is the king's brother'—went to where the lord of riches was. 
Going to him they in full related all about the doings of his 
brother. And on being permitted by the bestower of
treasures, they went out for battle. And then, like unto the
agitation of the ocean, there took place a mighty ferment of
the forces of the Nairita king, as if making the mountain 
tremble. And then there took place an encounter between 
the Yakshas and the Rākshasas; and therein the councillors 
of the Rākshasa were smitten fiercely. And finding his forces 
in that plight, Daçagriva set up full many a cheerful shout 
and in wrath began to speak. Of the councillors of the 
Rākshasa-chief, each coped with a thousand Yakshas. And 
then struck with maces and clubs and swords and darts and 
*tomaras*, the Ten-necked one dived into (that deep) of a 
host. And rendered inert and sore assailed, Daçānana was 
deprived of his movements with vollies of weapons 
remembling torrents of rain. And albeit drenched with blood 
streaming down in hundreds of torrents, he like a mountain 
flooded with a downpour, being wounded with the weapons 
of the Yakshas,—doth not betray any smart. And that 
high-souled one, raising up his mace resembling the rod itself of 
Time, entered into that army, despatching Yakshas to the 
abode of Yama. And as a flaming fire burneth up an 
extensive sward of grass stocked with dry fire-wood, he 
began to consume that Yaksha army. And as the wind 
scattereth clouds, the small remnant of Yaksha army was 
scattered by the redoubtable councillors 
(of Rāvana)—Mahodara, Suka, etc. And some were wounded, and (some) 
broken down, and (some) measured their lengths on the 
ground in the encounter, and other Yakshas deprived of 
their arms in the field, being fatigued, sank down, embracing 
each other, even as banks drop down, on being worn away by 
water. And no room was left (in the sky) in consequence of 
its being thronged by hosts of sages; and warriors, wounded 
and rushing for conflict, and (finally) ascending heaven. [#]_ 
And finding the foremost Yakshas endowed with great 
strength give way, the mighty-armed lord of riches dispatched 
(other) Yakshas. In the meantime, O Rāma, a Yaksha named 
Sanyodhakantaka, accompanied by an extensive force and a 
large number of vehicles,—on being despatched, rushed (on 
the foe). And wounded in the conflict (by Sanyodhakantaka) 
with his discus, as if by Vishnu himself, Māricha toppled 
down to the ground from the mountain, like unto a planet 
whose merit hath waned, And in a moment regaining his 
consciousness and resting (for a while), that night-ranger 
fought with the Yaksha; and thereat, on being defeated, he [#]_ 
fled. Then (Rāvana) entered within the gate-way (of the 
palace), garnished with gold, and decked with lapises and 
silver, And thereat, O king, the warder named Suryyabhānu 
prevented the night-ranger—Daçagriva—as he was entering. 
And albeit prevented, the night-ranger entered in. And 
when, O Rāma, that Rākshasa was prevented, he did not stay. 
And then struck by that Yaksha with the gate-way uprooted, 
he, discharging blood in streams, looked like a hill with 
minerals running on it. And hit with that gate-way 
resembling a mountain-summit in splendour, that hero did not sustain 
any injury, on account of the boon he had received from the 
Self-sprung. And on being struck by the same gate-way, 
the Yaksha ceased to be seen, his body having then been 
consumed to ashes. And witnessing the prowess of the 
Raksha, all began to flee; and then they afflicted with affright,
fatigued, and with pale faces, entered into rivers and caves, 
leaving their arms behind." 

.. [#] The idea of the author is: "The welkin was thronged with sages as well as warriors, who swelled the ranks of the sages stationed in the sky, by ascending heaven after having fallen in fight."—T.

.. [#] The Yaksha, that is. 

SECTION XV.
```````````

"Seeing the foremost of the Yakshas by thousands 
undergoing trepidation, the lord of riches spoke unto a mighty 
Yaksha—Manichara,—'O foremost of Yakshas, slay the wicked 
Rāvana, set on sin; and do thou (thus) become the refuge of 
those heroic Yakshas, who are carrying on the conflict.' 
Thus addressed, the mighty-armed and invincible Mānibhadra, 
surrounded by four thousand Yakshas began the fight. And 
attacking the Rākshasas with maces and clubs and bearded 
darts, and with darts *tomoras* and bludgeons, the Yakshas 
rushed at (their adversaries). And fast safely whirling about 
like hawks, they fought fiercely. And (some) said, 'Well, give 
me battle,' and (others), 'I don't want,' and (others, again), 
'Let me have (fight)'. And then the celestials and the 
Gandharvas and the sages studying the Vedas, beholding the 
great encounter, were filled with mighty amazement. And a 
thousand of the Yakshas were slain by Prahasta in the 
conflict; and another thousand of capable warriors were slain by 
Mahodara. And O king, in the twinkling of an eye Māricha, 
waxing wroth and eager for encounter brought down two 
thousand (of enemy's soldiers). Where is the candid-coursing 
fight of the Yakshas and where the fight of the Rakshas by 
help of the power of illusion; and therefore in that battle 
the advantage was on the side of the Rākshasas. And 
Dhumrācksha, confronting Mānibhadra in the mighty conflict hit him 
at the chest with a bludgeon; but he did not move thereat. 
And then Mānibhadra dealt the Rākshasa a blow with his mace; 
and thereat Dhumrācksha smit at the head fell down senseless 
(on the ground). And seeing Dhumrāckhsa wounded and 
down, bathed in blood, the Ten-necked one rushed at 
Mānibhadra in the encounter. And then that foremost of Yakshas 
hit Daçānana with three darts as he was rushing in wrath. 
And on being thus hit, (Rāvana) struck at Mānibhadra's 
head; and at that stroke his crown was depressed at one 
side. And from that day forth that Yaksha remained with 
his head hollow on one side. And on the high-souled 
Mānibhadra having been baffled, a great uproar, O king, rose in 
that mountain. And then at a distance, the lord of riches, 
mace in hand, accompanied by Sukra and Praushthapada 
and Padma and Sanka saw (Rāvana) in the field. And 
seeing his brother in the encounter with his glory obscured 
through the curse (he had ere this come by), the intelligent 
(lord of Yakshas) spoke in words worthy of the line of his 
grand-father,—'As, O wicked-minded one, thou desistest 
not, albeit forbidden by me, thou shalt, afterwards 
attaining the fruit of this, and repairing to hell, know (the 
fate that followeth thee). That perverse one, that through 
ignorance having drunk poison, neglects to adopt proper 
measures, knoweth the consequence of his act ultimately. 
The gods have set their face against thee on account of 
a certain misdeed of thine; and having for this, been 
reduced to this condition, thou dost not understand things. 
He that dishonoreth his father and mother [#]_ and spiritual 
preceptor, reapeth the fruit of his act on coming under the 
sway of the sovereign of the dead. Having regard that 
this body is uncertain, that foolish person, that doth not 
acquire asceticism, dying goeth the way that he deserveth.
The mind of a perverse man doth not willingly incline 
towards good; and he reapeth as he soweth. In this 
world people, making their own good fortune and beauty, 
strength, sons, wealth and valor, gain these by virtue of 
their pious acts. Being given to such iniquitous acts, 
thou wilt go to hell; and thy designs being such, I will not 
hold parley with thee. Honest people should act carefully 
in connection with the wicked.'—Thus reprimanded by him, 
his (Rāvana's) councillors, headed by Māricha, on being 
struck, took to their heels. Then Daçagriva on being 
struck in the head with the mace by the lord of Yakshas, 
did not move from his place. And then, O Rāma, the Yaksha 
and Rākshasa, smiting each other in mighty encounter, 
did not get bewildered or experience fatigue. And then 
the bestower of riches discharged a fiery weapon at him; 
and thereat the lord of Rākshasas resisted it with a Varuna 
weapon. And then the Rākshasa king entered upon 
Rākshasi-illusion; and began to assume a thousand 
shapes for compassing the destruction (of his adversary). 
And the Ten-necked one (successively) assumed the shapes 
of a tiger, a boar, a cloud, a hill, the ocean, a tree, a 
Yaksha and a Daitya. Thus he wore full many forms and 
he was not visible in his native shape. And then, O Rāma, 
seizing a mighty weapon the Ten-necked one, whirling 
the same, brought that redoubtable mace down on the head 
of the bestower of riches. Thus smitten by him, the 
lord of wealth, baffled, toppled down to the earth covered 
with blood like an *açoka* whose roots have been hewn 
away. Thereat Padma and other Nidhi deities, 
surrounding the granter of wealth, raised him up and brought 
him to the Nandana wood. Conquering the bestower of 
wealth, the lord of Rākshasas, with a delighted heart, 
possessed himself of his Pushpaka, the car, as a sign of victory; 
furnished with golden pillars, gateways set with lapises, 
covered with networks of pearls, having trees yielding 
the fruits of all seasons, endowed with the celerity of thought, 
ranging everywhere at will, wearing forms at pleasure, 
capable of coursing in the sky, with golden and jewelled 
stairs, and daises of polished gold,—the vehicle of the 
gods—undeteriorating, bringing delight to the mind and sight; 
wonderous exceedingly: painted with images designed to 
fill the mind with reverence,—constructed by Brahmā, 
containing all objects of desire, charming and nonpariel 
not cold and not yet hot, granting gratification in every 
season, and graceful to the view. And ascending that 
(car) coursing at will, won by his prowess, that utterly 
wicked one, out of swelling insolence, deemed himself master 
of the three worlds. And having vanquished the deity 
Vaiçravana, he descended from Kailāça. And having by 
his energy obtained the victory, the powerful night-ranger 
wearing a bright diadem and necklace, and seated on that 
superb car,—appeared radiant in his court like Fire himself." 

.. [#] Unless he serveth his parents, his heart doth not incline to piety. 

SECTION XVI. 
````````````

"O Rāma, having vanquished his brother, the lord of 
riches, the king of Rākshasas went to the great wood of 
reeds, where Mahāsena was born. And the Ten-necked 
one saw the great golden wood of reeds. Furnished with 
networks of solar rays, and appearing like a second Sun, 
and ascending the mountain, he was surveying the heart 
of the forest, when, O Rāma, Pushpaka was (suddenly) 
deprived of its motion. And the lord of Rākshasas could 
not comprehend how the car which had been so made as to 
course in accordance with the wish of the rider, could 
have its course impeded; and thereat he in company with 
his councillors thought, 'Wherefore doth not this Pushpaka 
course at my desire over this mountain? Whose act is 
this?' Thereat Māricha—foremost of intelligent 
ones—said,—That Pushpaka doth not course cannot, sire, be without 
cause; or it may be that in consequence of Pushpakā not 
having borne any other than the bestower of riches, it 
hath ceased its course not having the lord of wealth for its 
rider.' As they were speaking thus, that attendant of 
Bhava, Nandi, terrific, of yellow black hue, dwarfish, 
frightful, with his head shaven, having short arms, and 
stout,—coming up to them, said (this). And the lordly Nandi, 
undaunted, addressed the sovereign of the Rākshasas, 
saying: 'Desist thou O Ten-necked one; Sankara sporteth 
in the mountain; and (now) He is incapable of being 
approached by every one—birds, serpents and Yakshas; 
gods, Gandharvas and Rakshas?' Hearing Nandi's speech, 
(Rāvana), wrought up with wrath, his eyes coppery, and his 
ear-rings shaking, leapt down from Pushpaka. And saying, 'Who 
is this Sankara?' he came down to the base of the mount, and 
beheld there Nandi stationed at the side of that deity, 
supporting himself on his flaming dart, resembling a second Sankara. 
And seeing that one having the face of a monkey, the Rākshasa, 
deriding him, burst out into laughter, and seemed as if a mass 
of clouds were sending roars. Thereat, growing enraged, the 
reverend Nandi—Sankara's other body—spoke unto that 
Raksha—The Ten-necked one—present there; 'As O Daçanana, 
deriding me for my monkey-form, thou hast indulged in a 
laughter resembling the bursting of thunder, so monkeys 
endowed with prowess, and possessed of my form and energy shall 
be born for compassing the destruction of thy race. And 
armed with teeth and claws, and fierce and furnished with 
the fleetness of thought, and mad for encounter, and bursting 
with vigor, and resembling moving mountains. And being 
born, they shall crush thy high pride and power along 
with thy courtiers and sons. But, O night-ranger, I can 
even now end thee quite; yet I must not slay thee for thou 
hast ere this been slain by thine acts.' When that 
high-souled god had spoken thus celestial kettle-drums sounded 
and a blossomy shower rained from the sky. But without 
hefting Nandi's speech, that highly powerful 
one—Daçanana—coming to the mountain, said,—'O Gopati, I will even 
uproot this mountain, for whom Pushpaka was deprived of 
its motion as I was journeying. It must be known by what 
influence Bhavaswara sporteth here king-like. He doth not 
know that an occasion of fear hath presented itself?' Having 
said this, O Rāma, Rāvana seizing the mountain with his 
arms, lifted it up at once; and then the mountain 
trembled greatly. And in consequence of the mountain shaking 
the attendants of the deity (dwelling in it) also shook. And 
Pārvati also trembled and embraced Maheçwara. And then, 
O Rāma, Mahādeva—foremost of the deities—even Hara, 
as in sport pressed the mount with his great toe. And thereat 
his arms, resembling blocks of stone felt the shock and 
then there the councillors of that Raksha were struck with 
amaze. And the Raksha, from wrath and the pain felt in 
his arms, set up a shout that shook the entire triune world. 
And his councillors considered it as the concussion of the 
thunder at the universal disruption. And then the celestials 
with Indra at their head shook on their way; and the sea 
was wild and the mountains shook. And Yakshas and 
Vidyadharas and Siddhas asked, 'What is this.' 'Do 
thou propitiate Umā's lord—the blue-throated Mahādeva; for, 
O Daçanana, save him thy refuge see we none in this matter. 
Bowing thyself down, do thou seek him as thy shelter. 
Then the kind Sankara, on being gratified, will confer on thee 
his favor.' Thus accosted by his councillors, the 
Ten-faced one, bowing down to him having the bull for his 
standard, began to hymn him with various *soma* hymns; and 
the Raksha passed away a good thousand years in 
lamentations. And thereat that Lord Mahadeva, pleased, 
set free the hands of Daçanana stationed at the top of the 
mount, and O Rāma, addressed him, saying, 'O Dacānana, 
pleased am I with thee on account of thy hymns. And as 
in consequence of thy arms having been hurt by the mountain, 
thou hast uttered a terrific yell, which struck horror unto 
the three worlds and put them shaking, therefore, O King, 
thy name shall be Rāvana. And deities and men and Yakshas 
and others living on earth shall call thee Rāvana—terror to 
creatures. So, O Paulastya, which way thou wishest, and 
permitted by me, O Lord of Rākshasas, go thou.' Thus 
accosted by Sambhu, Lankā's lord said of himself. 'If thou 
art pleased with me, grant me a boon, who ask thee for 
it. I have already obtained a boon, bestowing on me 
immunity from death at the hands of gods, Gandharvas and 
Dānavas; and Rākshasas and Guyhakas and Nagas; and 
others also that are of more than ordinary strength. Man 
count I not O god: they, I deem, are insignificant. I have 
also, O destroyer of Tripura, received a long lease of life 
from Brahmā. Now I wish to pass the remainder of my 
days in peace: and do thou grant me a weapon.' Thus 
addressed by him, (Rāvana,) Sankara gave him an exceedingly 
effulgent sword, famed as Chandrahasa; and the master of 
spectres then also granted him peace for the rest of his life. 
And making (the sword) over to him, Sambhu said,—'Thou 
must not disregard this. If disregarded, it will for certain 
come (back) to me?' Having thus received his name from 
Maheçwara, Rāvana, saluting Mahadeva, ascended 
Pushpaka. And then, O Rāma, Rāvana, began to go round 
the earth. And opposed at places, by the heroic Kshatriyas 
endowed with energy and irrepressible in fight, who refused 
submission, he exterminated them along with their retainers; 
while other men of wisdom, knowing the Raksha to be 
invincible, said unto the Rākshasa elated with strength,—'We have 
been conquered?'" 

SECTION XVII.
`````````````

"And then, O King, the mighty-armed Rāvana 
ranging the earth, came to Himavān and began to go round it. And 
it came to pass that there he saw a damsel wearing a dark 
deer-skin and matted locks, leading the life of a saint, 
and flaming like a celestial. And seeing the girl observing 
high vows, endowed with beauty, he, with his soul overwhelmed 
with lust asked her, laughing, 'How is it, O amiable one 
that thou actest thus contrary to thy youth? This course 
of life surely doth not befit thy beauty. Thy loveliness, 
O timid one, is peerless, capable of maddening folk with 
desire. It doth not behove thee to lead an ascetic mode of 
life,—this would suit an old person. Whose daughter art 
thou, O gentle lady? And what is this (vow) that thou 
practisest? And O fair faced wrench, who is thy husband? 
He who hath thee for his wife, is, O timorous one, hath 
religious merit on earth. Tell all about this to me who ask for 
it. For whom dost thou put thyself to trouble?' Thus 
accosted by Rāvana, that illustrious girl, having asceticism for 
wealth, having received him hospitably in due form, said, 
'My sire is named Kuçodwaja—a Brahmarshi of immeasurable 
energy, son unto Vrihaspati, endowed with grace, and like 
unto Vrihaspati himself in intelligence. And while that 
high-souled one was engaged in the daily study of the Vedas, I 
was born as his word-impregnated daughter, named Vedavati. 
When the gods and the Gandharvas and the Yakshas, 
Rākshasas, and Pannagas, coming to my sire asked for me, 
O foremost of Rākshasas, my father did not bestow me on 
any one of them. And I shall tell thee the reason thereof; 
listen, O long-armed one. My father's intended son-in-law 
was even Vishnu—sovereign of the celestials, and the lord 
of the triune world; and my father would not bestow me on 
any other. And hearing this, a certain king of the Daityas, 
named Sumbhu—proud, of his prowess was wrought up with 
wrath, and one night as my sire was on bed, that wicked one 
slew him. Thereat my forlorn mother, of exalted righteousness,
embracing my father's body entered into fire. Then 
wishing to realize my father's wish touching Nārāyana, I have 
fixed my heart even upon him. Having made this promise, I 
have been carrying on rigid austerities. Thus, O foremost of 
Rākshasas. I have related unto thee everything. Nārāyana 
is my husband, and not any one else than that best of male 
beings; and desirous of having Nārāyana I have adopted 
severe restraints. I know thee, O king. Go thou O son 
of Paulastya. By virtue of my asceticism I know all that 
takes place in these three regions.' Thereat descending from 
the front of his car, Rāvana, afflicted with the shafts of 
Kandarpa, again addressed that girl, observant of a mighty vow, 
'O thou of shapely hips, in as much as such is thy intent, 
thou must be very proud. O thou having the eyes of a 
young antelope, accumulation of religious merit suits old 
people. Thou, furnished with every perfection, should not 
talk thus. Thou art the paragon in these three worlds. Thy 
youth waxeth away. I am the lord of Lankā, O gentle lady, 
known as Daçagriva. Be thou my wife, and enjoy pleasures 
according to thy desire. Who is he whom thou callest Vishnu? 
O mild one, neither in prowess, nor in asceticism, nor in 
enjoyment, nor in strength, is he my equal, whom, O damsel, 
thou seekest.' Thus accosted, Vedavati said unto the 
night-ranger 'Do not say so' in respect of Vishnu, lord 
of this triune sphere, bowed down unto by all creatures. 
Save and except thee alone, who, that is intelligent, crieth 
down (Nārāyana), O King of Rākshasas.' Thus addressed 
there by Vedavati, the night-ranger seized the girl by the 
hair. Thereat Vedavati, wroth, cut off her hair with her 
hand transformed into a sword. And then, flaming 
up in ire and as if consuming the night-ranger, she, 
preparing a funeral pyre, hastened to make away with herself.
'Thou abject, having been outraged by thee I wish not to 
live. Therefore, O Raksha, I will enter into fire in thy very 
presence. And as I have in this world been dishonored 
by thee thou art nefarious. I shall again be born to 
compass thy destruction. It lieth not in a female to slay 
a male intent on sin; and if I utter a curse, it shall cost my 
asceticism. But if I have done anything, given away any 
thing, offered oblations unto the fire, then I shall be the 
chaste daughter of some virtuous person, albeit unborn of 
any female vessel.' Having delivered herself thus, she 
entered into the flaming fire; and thereat a celestial shower 
of blossoms rained all around from heaven. O Lord, this 
is she that hath been born as the daughter of king 
Janaka,—thy wife, O mighty-armed one. Thou art the eternal Vishnu. 
The enemy, endowed with the splendour of a hill, formerly 
that had been slain through the wrath (of Vedavati), hath 
now been slain by her, by help of thine superhuman prowess. 
And this one of eminent righteousnesss would again spring 
up on earth like a flame from a field furrowed by the 
plough. This one named Vedavati was born in the Krita age; 
and in the Tretā age, for compassing the destruction of that 
Raksha, she was born in the Maithila line of the high-souled 
Janaka." 

SECTION XVIII.
``````````````

"When Vedavati had entered into fire, Rāvana, 
ascending Pushpaka, began to range the earth. And 
coming to Uçiraviga, Rāvana saw a king (named) 
Marutta, sacrificing along with the deities. And a 
righteous Brahmarshi named Samvartta, the very brother of 
Vrihashpati, officiated at the sacrifice accompanied by the 
deities. And seeing that Raksha invincible by reason of 
the boon he had received, the deities, apprehensive of 
being worsted by him, assumed the forms of beasts. And 
Indra became a peacock and the king of righteousness, 
a crow, and the bestower of riches a lizard, and Varuna 
a swan; and, O slayer of foes, others also became other 
beasts. And then Rāvana entered into that sacrifice 
like an unclean dog. And then coming up to the king, 
Rāvana—lord of Rākshasas—said: 'Give me battle, or 
say,—*I am defeated.*' Whereat king Marutta asked, 
him—'Who art thou?' And Rāvana laughing in 
contempt said,—'O king, I am delighted, that lacking 
curiosity, thou dost not dishonour Rāvana, younger brother 
unto the bestower of riches. What other man is there 
in these three regions that knoweth not the might of 
me, who, conquering my brother, has got possession of 
this car.' Thereat Marutta spoke unto Rāvana, 
saying,—'Blessed for sooth art thou, by whom thy elder brother 
hath been vanquished in fight; and a person so 
praiseworthy there is not in the three worlds. An act, that is 
divorced from righteousness and that is reprehended by 
people, can never be praiseworthy. Having committed 
a foul act, plumest thou upon thy having vanquished thy 
brother? And practising what piety hadst thou a-fortune 
received the boon? I had never before heard the like of 
what thou sayest. But O perverse one, stay now. Living 
thou shalt not back. To-day with my sharpened shafts 
shall I despatch thee to the abode of Yama.' Then taking 
up his bow and arrows, that king of men went out for 
encounter; but Samavartta stood in the way. And that 
great sage said unto Marutta words informed with affection 
'If thou hear my speech, thou shouldst not fight. If this 
Maheçwara-sacrifice should remain incomplete, it will 
burn up thy dynasty. Where is the fight of one initiated 
in a sacrifice? And where is the passion of one 
initiated in a sacrifice? And victory is ever uncertain; 
and the Rākshasa is difficult to vanquish. And 
thereupon, the lord of Earth—Marutta—desisted in 
consonance with the instructions of his spiritual preceptor; and 
composed addressed himself to completing the sacrifice, 
giving up his bow with the arrow set. And thereat 
considering him as defeated, Suka proclaimed this all round; and 
from delight cried aloud, 'Victory unto Rāvana!' And then 
devouring the Maharshis that were present at the place of 
sacrifice, Rāvana, satiated with their blood, again went to 
the earth. On Rāvana having departed, the deities, inhabiting 
the etherial regions—Indra etc.—assuming their proper 
forms, addressed those creatures. And from joy Indra spoke 
unto the purple-plumed peacock,—'Pleased am I with thee 
thou righteous one. No fear shall spring to thee from 
serpents; and thy plumage shall be furnished with an hundred 
eyes. And when I shall shower, thou shalt be filled with glee 
as a token of my satisfaction with thee.' Thus did 
Indra—chief of celestials, confer a boon on the peacock. Formerly, 
O king, the peacock's wings had one unvaried blue. Having 
received the boon, the peacock departed. Then O Rāma, 
the king of righteousness said unto the crow, seated in front 
of the sacrificial apartment 'O bird, I am well pleased with 
thee. Listen to my words as I utter them. As I have 
been pleased with thee, thou shalt without doubt, enjoy 
immunity from the various ailments to which the birds 
are subject. And O bird, from my curse fear of death 
shall not approach thee; and thou shalt exist so long 
as people do not slay thee. And those men residing in my 
dominion, being smitten with hunger, shall be refreshed 
along with thy relations, when thou hast eaten and 
been refreshed.' Then Varuna addressed that lord of birds 
the swan ranging the waters of the Gangā,—'Listen to my 
words fraught with joy, thy hue shall be charming, mild, 
and like unto the lunar disc; and it shall be beautiful, 
resembling the sheen of spotless foam. And approaching my 
person thou shalt ever be beautiful to behold; and thou 
shalt, as a sign of my gratification, attain unparalleled 
complacence.' Formerly, O Rāma, swans had not a hue 
of one unvaried whiteness. Their wings ended in blue, 
and their breasts wore the spotless hue of tender grass. And 
then Vaiçravana addressed the chameleon as it was stationed 
at the mountain: 'Thy hue shall be gold-gleaming. Pleased 
am I with thee. Thy undeteriorating head shall be ever 
gold-hued. And this golden hue of thine shall proceed from 
my gratification?' Having thus conferred boons on them at 
that festal place, the celestials, along with the king, (on 
the sacrifice) having ended, went to their abode." 

SECTION XIX. 
````````````

"Having vanquished Marutta, that lord of 
Rākshasas—the Ten-faced one—eager for encounter, began to range the 
capitals of the foremost monarchs (of the earth). And 
coming to the most powerful crowned heads (in the world) 
resembling Mahendra and Varuna, the Rākshasa king said: 
'Give me battle; or declare—we have been defeated. This 
I am resolved upon. Otherewise there is no escape for you?' 
Thereat those wise kings, possessed of great strength, and ever 
abiding by righteousness, being frightened (at Rāvana's 
intimidation), took counsel of each other. And knowing the 
superior strength of the foe, they said,—'We have been defeated.' 
Dushkanta, O child, and Suratha, and Gādhi, and Gaya 
and king Pururavā—all these kings said: 'We have been 
defeated.' And then Rāvana—sovereign of the 
Rākshasas—presented himself before Ayodhyā, governed by Anaranya, like 
Amarāvati ruled by Sakra. And coming to that foremost of 
men—king like unto Purandara himself in prowess, Rāvana 
said,—' Give me battle; or say I have been defeated. This is 
my mandate.' The lord of Ayodhyā, on hearing the words of 
that wicked-minded one, Anaranya, enraged, addressed the 
Rākshasa-chief, saying,—'O king of Rākshasas, I will give 
thee combat, stay thou. At once prepare for fight, and I also 
shall go and prepare myself.' And when he had heard everything 
(regarding Rāvana), the forces of that foremost of kings 
that had been intended for conquering (Rāvana), sallied 
forth ready for bringing about the destruction of the 
Raksha,—ten thousand elephants, a *niyuta* horse, and many thousands 
of cars and infantry, O best of men; and, that host 
consisting of infantry and cars, marched for encounter, 
covering up the earth. And then, O thou proficient in fight, 
there took place a mighty and wonderful encounter between 
king Anaranya and that lord of Rākshasas. And that host of 
the king encountering the forces of Rāvana, were extinguished 
like unto clarified butter thrown into the (sacrificial) fire. And 
having fought valorously for a long time, the remnant of 
the royal forces, suddenly coming in contact with the flaming 
Rākshasa ranks, were destroyed like unto swarms of locusts 
entering into fire. And he saw the mighty army of that 
powerful monarch destroyed by the (adversary), like unto a hundred 
streams absorbed by an approaching ocean. And then himself 
drawing his bow resembling the bow itself of Sakra, that 
foremost of sovereigns, beside himself with wrath, approached 
Rāvana. And brought down by Anaranya, his (Rāvana's) 
councillors—Māricha, Suka, and Sārana with Prahasta,—took 
to their heels like unto dear. And then that son of the 
Ikshwāku race discharged eight hundred arrows at Rāvana's 
head. And like unto showers pouring down on the top of 
a mountain, his shafts did not inflict any wound (on Rāvana). 
And then the king, smitten on the head with a slap by the 
enraged king of Rākshasas, dropped down from his car. 
And the king, deprived of his senses, fell down on the earth, 
with his body trembling all over; as falls in a forest a *sāla* 
scathed with heaven's fire. And thereat the Raksha, 
laughing, spoke unto that Ikshwāku, lord of the earth,—'What 
is this that thou hast gathered as the fruit of thy encounter 
with me. O king, there is none in this triune sphere that 
can combat with me. Having hitherto been sunk in lunacy 
thou hast not heard of my strength.' As he was speaking 
thus, the king, whose sounds were fast running out said: 
'What can I do in this matter. Verily time is incapable of 
being controlled. I have been overcome by Time; thou art 
merely an instrument. What can I do now, when I am going 
to lose my life? I never turned away from fight; I have 
been slain fighting. But, O Rākshasa, I shall tell thee 
something in consequence of the disgrace that the Ikshwāku
race has met with (to-day). If I have practised charity, if 
I have offered oblations into fire, if I have carried on pious 
penances, if I have governed my people well, then be my
words verified! There shall spring in the line of the 
high-souled Ikshwāku, one named Rāma—son unto Daçaratha, 
who shall deprive thee of thy life.' As he uttered this 
imprecation, the celestial kettle-drums sounded like the
roaring of clouds; and blossoms showered down from the sky. 
And then that best of kings went to heaven; and when that 
king had gone to the celestial regions, the Rākshasa (also) 
went away." 

SECTION XX. 
```````````

"As the lord of Rākshasas was ranging the earth 
frightening everyone, Nārada—foremost of ascetics, came to 
that wood mounted on a cloud. And thereupon saluting 
him, the night-ranger Ten-necked one—enquired after his 
welfare as well as the occasion of his visit. And that 
Devarshi—the exceedingly energetic Nārada of immeasurable 
splendour, seated on the back of the cloud, addressed 
Rāvana, who was stationed in Pushpaka, saying,—'O lord 
of Rākshasas, O placid one, O son of Viçravā, stay. I am 
well pleased with thy prowess and fame. And even as 
Vishnu had pleased me by destroying the Daityas, thou pleased 
me by harassing the Gandharvas and serpents. I will tell 
thee something. If thou wouldst hear what I have to say 
then, O child, listen heedfully as I unfold it. Why, my child, 
dost thou slay these; [#]_ thou art incapable of being slain by 
even the celestials. All these (men) are subject to death, they 
are verily slain. The world of man is unworthy of being 
afflicted by thee who art incapable of being destroyed by 
Deities, Dānavas, Daityas, Yakshas, Gandharvas and 
Rakshas. Who should slay creatures, who are ever stupid 
in respect of their welfare, environed by mighty 
dangers, and encompassed by decrepitude and hundreds o£ 
ailments? What sensible person can set his heart on 
slaying human beings who are everywhere beset with a 
perrennial stream of evils. Do not thou enfeeble those 
beings who are already enfeebled and smitten by Divinity 
with hunger, thirst, old age etc. and who are overwhelmed 
with sorrow, and grief. O mighty-armed one, O lord of 
Rākshasas, behold man, albeit having their sense stupified, 
engaged in the pursuit of various interests, and themselves 
not understanding their own ways; [#]_ some pass their time 
merrily with dancing and playing on musical 
instruments while others weep distressfully with tears streaming 
from their eyes down their cheeks. And down fallen on 
account of their attachment for their mothers and fathers and 
sons, and of their desires touching their wives and friends 
they set small store by labours having the hereafter as their 
object. What then is the use of afflicting a race that is 
brought down ever by its own infatuation. O placid one, 
this world is verily conquered by thee. These for certain 
will have to repair to the abode of Yama. Therefore, O 
Paulastya, O captor of hostile capitals, do thou put down 
Yama. On him being conquered, all will doubtless be 
conquered by thee.' Thus addressed Lankā's lord, flaming in 
native energy, addressed Nārada, laughing and saluting him, 
'O thou that delightest in the sport of gods and Gandharvas, 
and that takest pleasure in warfare, I am ready to go to the 
nethermost regions for the purpose of conquest. And 
conquering the three worlds, and bringing under subjection 
serpents and celestials I shall for ambrosia churn the nether 
regions.' Then the reverend sage Nārada spoke Unto the 
Ten-necked one,—'Who save thee can forsooth go on that 
journey? Verily, O irrepressible one, O destroyer of foes, 
the way leading to the city of the lord of the dead 
is difficult of access.' Thereat laughing, the Ten-faced 
one said to the saint resembling a mass of white clouds, 
'This is done. Therefore, [#]_ O great Brahman, intent upon 
slaying the Vaivaçwata's son, I will go by this way which 
leadeth to the king—the offspring of the sun. And, O 
master, from wrath I have vowed that I will, eager for 
encounter, O reverend one, conquer the four Lokapālas. Then 
here go I to the city of the lord of the Pitris; and I am 
determined to compass the death of him that visiteth creatures 
with smart.' Having delivered himself thus and saluted the 
sage, he, entering the southern way with his councillors, 
proceeded along. And the exceedingly energetic 
Nārada—best of Brahmans—resembling a smokeless fire, remaining rapt 
for a while, began to reflect;—'How can (Rāvana) conquer 
Time who, when its life waneth, righteously visiteth with 
affliction the time, sphere with Indra, fraught with mobile 
and immobile. How can this lord of Rākshasas, of himself, 
go to him who, resembling another fire, beareth to the 
gifts and acts (of persons),—that high-souled one of whom 
attaining consciousness, people put forth their activity; and 
afflicted with the fear of whom these three worlds fall away? 
How can (Rāvana) subdue him who ordaineth things both 
great and small, who meteth rewards and punishments for 
good and bad acts, and who himself hath conquered the three 
worlds? Resorting [#]_ to what other means shall Rāvana secure 
(victory)? I am curious about it: To Yama's abode shall I 
go for witnessing the encounter between Yama and the 
Rākshasa." 

.. [#] *i.e.* human beings. 

.. [#] *Gati*—according to the commentator, means the time of employment and suffering.—I think the ordinary meaning answers, and give it accordingly.-T. 

.. [#] *i.e.* As thou hast commanded me. 

.. [#] Explains the commentator: "Time hath every thing under its control. Like the all-enclosing space, time pervades all that is. This being so, resorting what transcending Time, shall Rāvana obtain victory over it." 

SECTION XX.
```````````

"Having reflected thus, that foremost of Vipras endowed 
with fleet vigor, bent his steps towards the abode of Yama, 
for the purpose of relating to him all that had taken place. 
And there (he) saw that god—Yama—sitting in front of fire 
and offering into it the good and evil fruits of their actions. [#]_

"And seeing the Maharshi Nārada arrive there, Yama 
offering him *arghya* according to the ordinance, addressed 
him saying, when he was seated at his ease: 'O Devarshi, 
is it well with thee? And doth virtue deteriorate.' [#]_ And, 
why, O thou honored of deities, and Gandharvas, dost thou 
come?' Thereat the reverend sage, Nārada, said; Hearken. 
I shall tell (thee); and (after hearing me out) do thou 
what is fit. O king of the Pitris, here cometh the 
night-ranger named ten-necked, for bringing thee under his 
sway—thee who art incapable of being conquered. And, 
O master, for this reason it is that I have come hither 
hastily,—doubtful what shall befall thee who hast the rod 
for thy weapon. In the meanwhile they saw the Raksha's 
car approach from afar, flaming and like unto the 
ray-furnished (one) risen. And dispelling the gloom of that 
region with the effulgence of Pushpaka, that exceedingly 
powerful (Rākshasa) came forward. And the mighty-armed 
ten-necked one all around saw creatures reaping the 
consequences of their fair and foul acts. And there he saw Yama's 
soldiery along with Yama's followers, fierce-forms, grim-visaged 
and terrific. And he saw corporeal beings undergoing 
torments and pain, and emitting loud cries and sharp shrieks; 
preyed on by worms and fell dogs: and uttering words 
capable of striking pain and terror into the heart (of the 
hearer): and people swimming in the Vaitaraini profusely 
running blood; and momentarily burning with hot sands; 
unrighteous wights pierced in a wood of *asipatra*, (plunged) 
in Raurava, in the river of borate of soda; and (cut) with 
razor-edges; asking for drinks; and afflicted with hunger 
and thirst; converted into corpses, lean, woe-begone, and 
pallid with hair flowing loosely; having dust and filth (on their 
bodies), and running about distressfully with dry forms;—on 
the way saw Rāvana by hundreds and by thousands. And 
Rāvana also saw some in front of houses engaged in 
merry-making with songs and strains of instruments,—as the fruit 
of their pious acts; and (saw) the giver of kine regailing 
themselves with milk; the dispenser of rice, feeding on the 
same, the bestower of abodes, enjoying mansions, as the 
fruit of their several acts; and persons living with 
damsels decked with gold and gems and jewels; and other 
pious folks, flaming in their native energy, all these saw 
Rāvana lord of Rākshasas. And by his might that mighty 
one delivered those that were being tormented by their 
wicked acts. And on being liberated by that Raksha—the 
ten-necked one, those creatures in a moment began to enjoy 
their release, that had come to them without thought or 
suspense. And on the dead being delivered by the 
magnanimous Rākshasa, the guards of the dead, getting enraged, 
rushed at the Rākshasa sovereign. And there arose a mighty 
tumult from all sides; from the heroic warriors of the king of 
righteousness rushing (all around.) And those heroes by 
hundreds and by thousands assailed (Pushpaka) with *prāças*, 
and bludgeons, and darts and maces, and spears and *tomaras*. 
And swiftly swarming like bees, they began to break the 
seats, blocks, daises and gateways (of the car.) And in that 
conflict Pushpaka presided over by divine energy, incapable 
of being destroyed by virtue of Brahmā power, being broken, 
resumed its former shape. Countless were the soldiers of 
that high-souled one consisting hundreds and thousands of 
heroic warriors, (ever) forward for fight. And according 
to the measure of their might his (Rāvana's) 
councillors—great heroes all, as well as the ten-faced one himself with 
might and main, fought with trees and crags and hundreds 
of blocks of buildings. And those councillors of the lord 
of Rākshasas, assailed with every kind of weapons, with 
their persons bathed in blood, fought fiercely. And O 
large-armed one the exalted councillors of Yama and Rāvana sore 
assailed each other with arms. And leaving the councillors 
alone the highly powerful warriors of Yama rushed against 
Daçānana [#]_ with a shower of spears. And then pierced through 
and through by those weapons, with his person covered with 
blood, the Rākshasa king appeared like a flowering Kinçuka 
in Pushpaka. [#]_ And thereat that powerful one, by virtue of 
his mastery over weapons, began to hurl darts and maces, 
*prāças* and spears and *tomaras* and crags and trees. And 
that terrific shower of trees, rocks and arms, alighted on 
the army of Yama (fighting) on the earth. And snapping 
those weapons and resisting (those vollies of) arms, they 
smote at the Rākshasa fighting alone by hundreds and 
thousands. And encompassing him even as clouds encompass a
mountain, they rendered (Rāvana) inert by means of 
*Bhindipālas* and darts. And with his mail torn open, his 
anger raging fiercely, and covered with blood streaming over 
his person, he, forsaking his car, stood upon the ground. 
And then furnished with his bow and holding his shafts, 
(Rāvana) regaining his senses in a short time, increased in 
energy and stood in the field like the finisher. And now 
fixing the divine Pāçupata on his bow, and saying unto 
them, 'Slay! Slay!' he drew that bow. And enraged, (Rāvana) 
resembling Rudra himself, in fight drawing his bow to his 
car, discharged that shaft even as Sankara had discharged at 
Tripura. And the appearance of the shaft was like an 
extinguishing fire in summer with smoke with flames, 
burning up a forest. And garlanded with glory that shaft 
followed by ghosts, [#]_ in that encounter; rushed on, burning to 
ashes the loose bushes and trees lying in its way. And burnt 
up by its energy, the most of Vaivaswata fell down in the 
field like unto banners of Mahendra. And thereat the 
Rākshasa of terrific prowess along with his councillors began 
to set up tremendous shouts; as if making the earth tremble." 

.. [#] Ordaining happiness and misery to the lives of people according to their acts.—T. 

.. [#] The original has: "Doth not virtue wane." This in English would imply the very reverse what Nārada intends to say. He says: "Doth religion deteriorate?"—*i.e.* "I hope, religion doth *not* deteriorate." This is an idiom and natural usage accounts for it, although that usage must in the nature of things be based on a subtle ground of reason.—T. 

.. [#] Rāvana. 

.. [#] This simile is peculiarly appropriate and beautiful. Pushpaka, the name of Rāvana's car, means composed of flowers; and this signification shining askance, as it were, over the direct sense of the sentence, heightens the delight the reader feels on imagining the principal figure. 'Rāvana seated in *Pushpaka*, covered with blood, looked like a blossoming Kinsuka.'—T. 

.. [#] The instrument being Siva's, it naturally was followed by ghosts, as his attendants.—T. 

SECTION XXII.
`````````````

"Hearing his mighty shouts, that lord Vaivaswata knew 
that his adversary had gained the day and that his own 
host had been destroyed. And knowing that his forces had 
been slain, he, with his eyes crimsoned with passion hastily 
spoke unto his charioteer, 'Bring thou my car.' And 
thereat the charioteer brought the noble and mighty car and stood 
(there) and then that exceeding energetic one mounted the 
car. And in front (of his car) stood death, equipped with 
*praças* and maces in his hands, who makes nothing 
of this entire triune world; incapable of deterioration. And 
beside (him) was the rod of Time in its native from—the divine 
instrument of Yama like unto a flaming fire on account of 
its own energy. And then on beholding Time, infuriated, 
tending to strike terror into all creatures, was agitated the
triune universe, and trembling over took the denizens of 
heaven. And the charioteer urged on the steeds 
possessed of graceful splendour; and arrived where the lord of 
Rākshasas was posted. And in a moment those horses 
like unto thought (in celerity,) and resembling the steeds 
themselves of Hari, took Yama where the warfare had already 
begun. And seeing the frightful car in that aspect with 
Death present in it, the ministers of the Rākshasa monarch 
at once took to their heels. And in consequence of their 
being comparatively inferior in point of strength they were 
deprived of their senses, and afflicted with fear; and saying, 
'Here we are not equal to fighting' they went their way. 
But seeing that car capable of striking terror into folks, the 
Ten-necked did not experience any agitation, nor did fear 
enter his heart. And approaching Rāvana, Yama, enraged, 
discharged spears and *tomaras*, and began to pierce Rāvana's 
marrow. But Rāvana, without at all feeling any smart, 
began to shower arrows on Vaivaswata's vehicle, resembling 
a downpour caused by clouds. And again at his spacious 
breast, that Rākshasa who had undergone slender injury, 
could not resist, (Yama's arms) with hundreds of mighty 
darts hurled. And in this way that destroyer of foes—Yama 
fought for seven nights with various arms; until at length 
his enemy was driven back and deprived of his senses. And 
then, O hero, there took place mighty onset between Yama 
and the Rākshasa both eager for victory and both never 
tiring of fight. And celestials and Gandharvas and 
Siddhas, and the supreme saints, placing Prajapati at their 
head, presented themselves at the fight. And the 
encounter that then took place between that foremost of 
of Rākshasas and the lord of the Dead was like the 
universal upheaval. And stretching his bow resembling in 
spleandour the thunderbolt of Indra, he discharged arrows covering 
up the sky. And he smote Death with four, the (Yama's) 
charioteer with seven, and swiftly struck Yama in the marrow 
with hundreds and thousands of shafts. And then from 
forth Yama's mouth there issued darted flames with his teeth 
mixed with smoke, the fire of his fury. And witnessing 
this wonder in the presence of the deities and Dānavas, 
both Death and Time were fired with wrath and were 
filled with delight. And the Death, growing still more 
wroth, addressed Vaivaswata saying;—'Let me go. I shall 
slay this sinful Rākshasa. Even this is my native might 
this Rākshasa will be no more. Hiranyakaçipu, the 
graceful Nemuchi, and Shamvara, Nishandi and Dhumaketu 
and Virochana's offspring Vāli, and the Daitya Shamvu 
that mighty monarchs, Vritra and Bāna; and Kājarshis 
versed in all branches of learnings and Grandharvas, and 
mighty serpents, and sages, and Pannagas and Yakshas, 
and swarms of Apsarās and the Earth herself containing 
vasty oceans and mountains and rivers and trees, at the 
unrolling of a Yuga—all these, O mighty monarch 
have I brought to dissolution. All these and many more 
endowed with strength and incapable of being overcome, 
were at the very sight of me compassed with 
peril,—and what is this ranger of the night? Let me go. O thou 
cognizant of righteousness,—I shall slay this one. There is 
none that, albeit strong, can survive after having been seen 
by me. Verily this is not mine strength,—this might 
pertaineth to me by nature. O Time, if seen by me, he won't 
live for a moment.' Hearing these words of his, the puissant 
king of righteousness spake there unto death,—'Do thou stay. 
I myself shall slay him.' Then with his eyes reddened that 
lord, Vaivaswata, wielded with his hand the infallible 
dart of time; while by him lay the redoubtable noose of 
time and the mace in its native shape resembling fire and the 
thunderbolt. He, who by his very sight draweth away the 
lives of creatures,—what should be said of its touching and 
being hurled at people? And touched by that powerful one, 
that mighty weapon, *engist* with flames, attained access of 
energy, and seemed to consume the Rākshasa. And in the 
field of battle, every one afflicted with fear, ran away from 
it. And beholding Yama with his rod uplifted, the celestials 
were agitated. And on Yama being desirous of slaying 
Rāvana, the great-father manifesting himself spake unto 
Yama: 'O Vaivaswata, O mighty-armed one, O thou of 
immeasurable prowess, this certainly must not be; Thou
shouldst not with thy rod slay the night-ranger; for, O 
foremost of celestials, I have conferred a boon on him; 
and thou shouldst not render false the words that I have 
uttered. Verily he, that, whether a god or a human being, 
shall falsify my words, shall render this triune universe 
false. There is no doubt about this. If this terrific weapon, 
capable of affrighting the three spheres, be discharged alike 
at friends and foes, it will destroy creatures. This rod of time, 
of immeasurable might and incapable of being resisted by 
creatures, was created by me as having the power of 
compassing the death of all beings. Therefore, O mild one, 
thou forsooth shouldst not bring it down on Rāvana's head. If 
this alights on any one, he doth not live for a moment, 
Whether on this weapon allighting, the ten-necked does not 
die, or if he does do either way falsehood is the consequence, 
therefore do thou keep thy uplifted weapon off Lankā's 
lord. If thou have any care for these worlds do thou 
establish my truth.' Thus addressed, Yama then answered, 
'I restrain this rod. Thou art our Lord. But as 
I can not slay this one who hath obtained a boon, what 
then shall I do now in the field? Therefore shall I disappear 
from the sight of this Raksha.' Having said this, even 
there did he vanish with his car and horses. And having 
vanquished him and distinguished his name, he again ascended 
his Pushpaka and went out of the abode of Yama. And 
with a delighted heart Vaivaswata along with the deities 
headed by Brahmā—as well as that mighty ascetic-Nārada, 
went to the celestial regions." 

SECTION XXIII.
``````````````

"Having vanquished Yama, the foremost of celestials, 
Rāvana delighting in warfare, saw his adherents. And seeing 
Rāvana, with his person bathed in blood, bettered by the 
weapon discharged at him, they were seized with surprise. 
And hailing him with victory, the councillors headed by 
Māricha, having been encouraged by Rāvana, ascended 
Pushpaka. And then the Raksha entered the region 
of waters—the abode of Daityas and serpents, well protected 
by Varuna. And arriving at Bhogavati—the city governed 
by Vāsuki, he brought the serpents under subjection and 
then, delighted, bent his course to the palace—Manimayi. 
There dwelt the Nivatakavachas, who had obtained boons. 
Those Daityas were possessed of prowess and endowed with 
strength,—carrying various weapons, breathing high spirits and 
invincible in battle. And the Dānavas and Rākshasas 
growing enraged fell to raving each other with darts and 
tridents, Kuliças and axes and *pattiças*. And as they fought 
one entire year passed away and neither side obtained 
victory or was worsted. And then that way of the triune 
sphere, that God, the undeteriorating Great-father, swiftly 
presented himself on the scene mounted on his excellent 
car. And making the Nivatakavachas desist from battle 
the ancient great-father spake in clear words—'Even 
the celestials and the Asuras are not able to 
vanquish this Rāvana in battle; nor can the Dānavas 
backed by the gods can destroy you. Do you therefore 
turn your minds to making friends with the Rākshasa. 
All interests are forsooth the common possession of friends.'
Thereat Rāvana made friends with the Nivatakavachas 
in the presence of Fire; and then rejoiced greatly. And duly 
honored (by them) Daçānana passed there a year, without 
any feeling of that place being different from his own home: 
and spent his time agreeably. And having learnt there 
an hundred sorts of illusion, he directed his course to 
Rasatala, searching for the city of the lord of waters. And then 
going to the city named Açma ruled by the Kalakayas, 
(Rāvana) slew the Kalakayas endowed with terrific 
strength; and then with his sword cut off his brother-in-law, [#]_ 
the husband of Surpanakhā, the mighty Vidyutjibha 
possessed of terrific strength; as that Rākshasa in the encounter was 
licking (the limbs of Rāvana's followers). [#]_ Having vanquished 
him, he, in a moment, destroyed four hundred Daityas. And 
then the lord of Rākshasas saw the grand abode of Varuna 
resembling a mass of white clouds, and effulgent like 
unto Kailāça itself;—and also saw the milk-conserving 
Surabhi stationed there; from the streams of whose milk 
was produced the ocean named Kshiroda. [#]_ And there 
Rāvana saw the mother of kine and the foremost of bulls; 
from whom springeth that maker of night the 
mild-beaming-moon; taking refuge under whom subsist the prime 
saints and those living on froth, the froth [#]_ (of milk); and 
wherefrom sprang ambrosia as well as the Swadha of 
Swādhā-subsisting ones, [#]_ even her that goeth with human beings 
under the name of Surabhi. Having gone round this 
wonderful (cow), Rāvana entered the exceedingly dreadful 
abode of Varuna guarded by various kinds of forces. And 
then he beheld Varuna's splendid mansion, streaming with 
hundreds of torrents, resembling a mass of autumnal clouds, 
and always wearing a delightful aspect. And killing the 
generals of the forces, after having been resisted by them, 
he addressed the warriors, saying,—'Do you speedily acquaint 
your king with this. Rāvana hath come here seeking 
battle. Do thou give him fight, or say with joined 
hands, "I have been defeated by thee," and then thou 
hast no fear whatever.' In the meantime the sons and 
grandsons of the high-souled Varuna, as well as those of 
Pushkara issued forth. And they, endowed with every 
virtue, accompanied by their own forces, yoked cars 
furnished with the effulgence of the rising Sun, and coursing 
at the desire of their riders. And then there took place a 
mighty encounter capable of making people's down stand 
on end, between the sons of the lord of waters, and those 
of the intelligent Rāvana. And in a short while that entire 
host of Varuna was brought down by the highly powerful 
councillor of that Rākshasa Daçagriva. And seeing their 
own forces brought to straits in the conflict and driven 
back in the fight with networks of shafts, and down 
on the ground and seeing Rāvana in Pushpaka, Varuna's 
sons swiftly shot into the welkin with their fleet-footing cars. 
And after they had attained a station of equal vantage 
(with Rāvana) in the sky, [#]_ great was the encounter that then 
took place in the sky, resembling the encounter of the 
deities and the Dānavas. And turning away Rāvana in 
the conflict by means of shafts resembling fire, they, 
exceedingly rejoiced, emitted various shouts. And then 
Mahodara, enraged on seeing the king sore pressed, casting 
off fear, and wrought up with rage, began to go around, 
eager for fight. And smit with his mace by Mahodara, 
Varuna's sons coursing at will and resembling the wind (in 
velocity), dropped down to the ground. And having slain 
those warriors and also those horses of Varuna's sons 
(Mahodara) seeing them lying down deprived of their cars 
swiftly sent up a tremendous cheer. And destroyed by 
Mahodara, their cars and horses together with their 
foremost charioteers, lay low on the earth. And then 
forsaking their cars, the sons of the high-souled Varuna, stationed 
in the sky, did not experience any pain [#]_ by virtue of their 
native power. And having stretched their bows they pierced 
Mahodara, and then, all together they greatly angered 
prevented Rāvana. As the clouds, with a thousand torrents 
cleave a mountain, so they, with dreadful shafts, resembling 
thunderbolts and discharged off the bows, pierced him. 
Thereupon the Ten-necked (demon), excited with wrath like 
the fire of dessolution, pierced them to their very vitals 
with highly dreadful arrows. And stationed above, he 
showered on them variegated maces, *Vallās*, [#]_ *Pātticas*, *saktis* 
and huge *Sataghnis*. 

"Thereupon with the arrows the infantry were greatly 
exhausted like unto young elephants six years old, fallen 
in mire. Beholding Varuna's sons thus worn out and 
overwhelmed the highly powerful Rāvana roared in delight 
like unto clouds. Thereupon emitting loud cries the 
Rākshaha, like unto a cloud, with a downpour of diverse 
shafts, destroyed the offspring of Varuna. Thereupon they 
were all defeated and fell dead on the ground and all their 
followers fled away from the field of battle to their homes. 
Rāvana spoke unto them.—'Do ye communicate this to 
Varuna.' Whereto his minister Prahasta replied unto 
Rāvana saying—'O great king—Varuna's sons are slain 
and the lord of waters, whom thou art inviting for battle, 
hath gone to the region of Brahmā, to hear songs. While 
the king is away, what is the use of taking trouble, O hero? 
And all these heroic sons (of Varuna) have been vanquished.' 
Hearing these words and spreading his own name the lord 
of Rākshasas expressing sign of joy, issued out of 
Varuna's abode. And returning by the way by which he had 
come, the Raksha, stationed in the welkin, proceeded towards 
Lankā." 

.. [#] *Cyalā* means a wife's brother, Vidyujjibha was however, *the husband of his sister*.—T. 

.. [#] This explanation is the commentator's.

.. [#] Lit. the sea of milk. 

.. [#] A typical instance of the lengths which the self-denial of the Hindu sages went is furnished by the case of a certain class of ascetics, who, abstaining from every other kind of food, lived solely on the froth of milk, falling off from the udders after the calf had drunk it. This froth-drinking, in preference to drinking the milk itself was dictated by a motive of charity—*viz*, not to deprive the calf of her legitimate fare.—T 

.. [#] The ancestral manes. 

.. [#] Ere this Rāvana was fighting on Pushpaka, while Varuna's sous fought on the earth. 

.. [#] By virtue of their immortal origin.

.. [#] An arrow with a crescent-shaped head. 

SECTION XXIV.
`````````````

"And again journeyed in the city of Açma (the followers of 
Rāvana) dreadful in fight. There the Ten-necked demon beheld 
a highly picturesque house—adorned with networks of pearls, 
having gateways crested with Vaidurjas, golden pillars and 
abounding in pavements. And the stairs, of that picturesque 
house resembling the abode of Mahendra, covered with
girdles, were made of crystal. Beholding that excellent boost 
the highly powerful Rāvana thought within himself—'Whose 
is this beautiful house, resembling the summit of Meru? Go 
O Prahasta, and learn quickly whose house is this.' Thus
ordered, Prahasta entered that excellent house—and finding 
none in one appartment he entered another and thus entering 
seven apartments he at last saw a flame of fire. There was 
a man in that flame, who, when seen, laughed aloud. Hearing 
that dreadful laughter Prahasta's down stood on their end. 
There was another man in that flame, as if in a swoon, 
engarlanded with golden lotuses, incapable of being looked 
at, like the sun, and resembling the Yama's self. Beholding 
that the night-ranger speedily issued out of the house and 
communicated it unto Rāvana. Thereupon, O Rāma, having 
descended from Pushpaka, the Ten-necked demon, black as 
collyrium, entered that house. (Immediately) obstructing the 
door there stood a huge-bodied man, dreadful like Siva—his 
tongue was all flame, his eyes were red, rows of teeth 
beautiful, lips like *Bimba*, his form was handsome, nose 
dreadful, neck like a shell marked with three lines, jaws 
were spacious, beards thick, bone fleshy, teeth huge and his 
appearance was all dreadful. And taking up an iron mace 
he stood at the gate. Beholding him, Daçānana's hairs 
stood on their end—his heart and body trembled. And 
seeing these bad omens, O Rāma, he began to think within 
himself. He thus meditating that man said—'What art 
thou thinking, O Rākshasa? Tell me all in confidence. I 
shall confer upon thee the hospitality of fighting, O hero, 
O night-ranger.' Having said this he again spoke unto 
Rāvana, saying—'Dost thou wish to enter into conflict with 
Bali, or what else is thy intention?' Rāvana was so 
overwhelmed that his hairs stood on their end; but resorting to 
calmness he said—'O thou foremost of those skilled in 
speech, who residest in this house? I shall fight with him; 
speak out what thou wishest.' He again said (to 
Rāvana)—'The lord of Dānavas lives here—he is highly generous, 
heroic, and hath truth for his prowess. He is gifted with 
many qualities, resplendent like unto Yama with mace 
in his hand or the newly risen sun and incapable 
of being defeated in conflict, impetuous, invincible, victorious, 
powerful, a veritable ocean of accomplishments, 
sweet-speeched, supporter of the dependants, fond of preceptor and 
Brahmans, always waiting for opportune hours, gifted with 
high powers, truthful, of a handsome person, skilful, gifted 
with all accomplishments, heroic and engaged in the study 
of the Vedas. He sometimes walks on foot and moves about 
like the wind—he shines like fire and spreads heat like the 
sun. He travels with the gods, spirits, serpents and birds. He 
does not know fear; dost thou wish to fight with him? If thou
dost wish to fight with Bali, O lord of Rākshasas, O thou gifted 
with great energy, do thou speedily enter (this house) and 
engage in the encounter.' Being thus addressed the 
Ten-necked demon entered where Bali was. Beholding the lord
of Lankā, the foremost of Dānavas, resembling the flaming
fire, and hard to look at like the sun, laughed. And taking 
that Rākshasa by the hand and placing him on his lap he
said. 'O Ten-necked lord of Rākshasas, O thou having
long arms, what desire of thine may I satisfy? Do thou tell
me what for thou hast come hither.' Being thus addressed by
Bali Rāvana said—'I have heard, O illustrious sir, that 
formerly thou wast bound by Vishnu. Forsooth I am 
capable of releasing thee from the bonds.' Hearing that Bali 
laughed and said—'Hear, I shall relate to thee what thou 
hast asked, O Rāvana. The red-hued man, who stands always 
at the door—by him formerly all the leading Dānavas and 
other powerful lords were brought into subjection—by him
I was also bound. He is invincible like unto death; who is 
there on this earth that can deceive him? He, who stands 
at the door, is the destroyer of all beings, creator and 
preserver and the lord of the three worlds. Thou dost not know 
him nor do I. He is identical with past, future and present
and is the lord. He is Kali and he is Time—the destroyer
of all beings. He is the destroyer and the creator of the 
three worlds—and he slays all beings mobile and immobile.
And that lord of all gods again creates the universe without 
beginning or end. O night-ranger, he governs and preserves 
all sacrifices, gifts and oblations to fire. Forsooth he is the 
creator and the preserver of the universe—there is none so
wonderful in the three worlds. O son of Pulasta, He hath 
been guiding the former Dānavas, myself, yourself like so 
many beasts bound with ropes. Vitra, Danu, Suka, Sambhu, 
Nishumbha, Sumbha, Kālanemi, Prahlada and others, Kuta, 
Vairochana, Mridu, Jamala, Arjuna, Kansa, Kaitabha, and 
Madhu used to impart heat like the sun, appear resplendant 
like the rays, move about like air and pour showers like 
Indra. All of them celebrated many a sacrifice and were 
engaged in austere penances. All of them were high-souled 
and considered the practice of Yoga as a great virtue. 
Having got by an immense accession of wealth they enjoyed 
many pleasures, made many gifts, celebrated many sacrifices, 
studied (many lores) and governed their subjects. They were 
all protectors of their own kith and kin and slayers of 
enemies; and in battle, there was none equal to them in the 
three worlds. They were all heroic, of a high pedigree, versed 
in all sacred writings, proficient in all branches of learning and 
indomitable in warfare. Having defeated thousands of 
celestials in conflict, the high-souled ones conquered the 
regions. They were always engaged in those works which 
were not liked by the celestials and used to maintain their 
own men. They were all inflated with pride and haughtiness 
and effulgent like the newly-risen sun. The glorious Hari, 
the lord Vishnu, knoweth only how to bring about their 
destruction who perpetually assail the celestials. He creates 
all these and He, bringing about their destruction, 
existeth in Himself at the time of dissolution. These 
highly powerful and high-souled Danava chiefs, 
assuming shapes at will, have been destroyed by the glorious God. 
Besides, all these heroes, who have been heard of as being 
irrepressible and invincible in warfare, have been 
discomfitted by the wondrous power of Kritānta.' Having 
said this the lord of Dānavas again spoke unto the lord of 
Rākshsas—'O hero, O thou gifted with great strength, take 
that flaming discus which thou beholdest and come to my 
side. I shall then relate to thee the means of eternal 
liberation. Do what I have told thee, O thou having long 
arms. Delay not Rāvana.' Hearing this the highly 
powerful Raksha proceeded, laughing, O descendant of Raghu, 
where that celestial *kundala* was. Rāvana, proud of his prowess, 
easily took it up but could not move it by any means. And 
being ashamed that highly powerful one again attempted. 
As soon as it was uplifted the Rākshasa dropped down on 
ground, bathed in a pool of blood, like unto an uprooted 
Sāla tree. In the meantime there arose a sound from 
Pushpaka, and the councillors of that lord of Rākshasas cried 
aloud. Regaining his sense that Raksha rose up in a moment 
and lowered his head in shame. Bali said to him—'Do thou 
come, O foremost of Rākshasas and hear my words. O hero, 
the *kundala*, crested with jewels, which thou didst assay to take 
up, is an ornament for the ear of one of my forefathers. 
This fell here on the ground, O thou gifted with great 
strength; another *kundala* was thrown on the summit 
of the mountain. Besides these *kundalas* his crown 
was also cast off on the ground before the altar during the 
encounter. Formerly none bore enmity towards my ancestor 
Hiranya Kasipu—Time death, or illness. He had no death 
during the day, night, evening or morning. O foremost 
of Rākshasas, he did not experience death from any 
weapon whatsoever. He created a dreadful enmity 
with Prahlada. This conflict having taken place with the 
high-souled and heroic Prahlada there rose up a dreadful figure 
of man-lion—a terror unto all, O foremost of Rākshasas. 
And that terrible figure casting his looks about, all the worlds 
were over-whelmed. 

"'Thereupon taking him up with his arms he destroyed 
him with his nails. The person, who is standing at the door, 
is this supreme Yasudeva, void of passion. I shall now 
relate to thee the words of that supreme God; do thou 
hear, if thy heart is filled with spiritual thoughts. The 
person, who is standing at the door, hath brought into 
subjection, in thousands of years, a thousand of Indras, an 
Ayuta of gods and hundreds of great Rishis.' Hearing 
these words Rāvana said—'(I have seen) Kritānta, the lord 
of spirits with Death himself, with hairs standing erect. 
Serpents and scorpions are his hairs—his tongue is hard as 
the lightning, his teeth are dreadful—his eyes are red and 
he is gifted with great velocity and a terror unto all beings. 
He is incapable of being looked at like unto the sun, 
unconquerable in battle and is the chastiser of the sinners. He 
even was defeated by me in conflict. There I did not feel 
the least pain or fear, O lord of Dānavas. I do not know 
(this person)—it behoveth thee to give me an account.' 

"Hearing the words of Rāvana Bali said—'He is the 
lord Hari—Nārāyana—the protector of the three worlds. 
He is Ananta, [#]_ Kapila, [#]_ Jishnu, [#]_ and the highly effulgent 
Man-lion. [#]_ He is Kratudhāma, [#]_ Sudhāma, [#]_ and hath the dreadful 
mace in his hand. He is like unto the twelve Adityas, 
Purana and the excellent Purusha; he is like unto the red 
clouds—the lord of gods and the best god. O thou having 
long arms, he is encircled by flames, a great devotee and fond of
devotees; this lord preserveth the universe and hath created 
it. And he, gifted with great strength, brought about 
destruction in the form of Time; and this Hari, with a discus 
in his hand, is sacrifice and is being worshipped in sacrifices. 
He is at one with all gods—all beings, all worlds and all 
knowledge. He is all forms, the great form, Baladeva and 
hath long arms; he slayeth heroes, hath heroic eyes, is 
imperishable and the preceptor of the three worlds. All 
these sages, who long for final liberation, meditate upon 
him—he, who can know this Purusha, is not sullied with sins. 
By remembering him, hearing of him and worshipping 
him, every thing can be obtained.' Hearing these words 
of Bali, the highly powerful Rāvana, having his eyes 
reddened with ire, issued out with uplifted weapon. Beholding 
him thus excited, the lord Hari, with a club in his hand, 
thought within himself, O Rāma, 'I shall not slay this sinner 
for the satisfaction of Brahmā' and assuming his own shape 
disappeared. And not beholding that Purusha there, the 
night-ranger issued out of the abode of Varuna, shouting 
with joy. He went away by the way he had come." 

.. [#] Lit, eternal, endless. Here it is the name of Vishnu. 

.. [#] A celebrated Muni or saint, the founder of the *Sankhya* system of philosophy; the son of Kardama by Devahuti and according to some an incarnanation of Vishnu. 

.. [#] Lit—victorious, or triumphant, a name of Vishnu. 

.. [#] *Narasinha*—a. name of Vishnu. When prayed for by Prahlada to appear from a pillar Vishnu came out in the shape of man-lion and slew Hiranya-Kasipu—the king of Daityas and father of Prahlada.

.. [#] Protector of sacrifices—a name of Vishnu. 

.. [#] Here it is evidently one of the names of Vishnu. In Vishnu Purana, Book I, Chapter X. we find another account, Vireyas, married to Gauri, had Sudaman, a Loka pala, or ruler of the east quarter, as his son. 

SECTION XXV. 
````````````

"Thereupon meditating for sometime the lord of Lankā 
went to the region of the sun and spent the night upon the 
picturesque summit of the mount Meru. And ascending the 
car Pushpaka having the velocity of the sun's steeds, he, by 
various courses, went on and beheld the glorious sun, gifted 
with all radiance, purifying all, wearing golden *Keyuras* and 
clothes crested with jewels. His beautiful countenance was 
adorned with a pair of excellent *Kundalas*; and his person 
was embellished with *Keyuras*, *Nishkas* and garlands of red 
lotuses. His body was annointed with red sandal and was 
radiant with a thousand rays. And beholding that foremost 
of gods—the sun—that primeval deity, without end or middle, 
having Uchaisravas as his carrier, the witness of the world 
and the lord of the universe, the foremost of Rākshasas, 
being overwhelmed with his rays, said to Prahasta—'O 
minister, do thou proceed at my behest and communicate unto 
him my orders—"Rāvana hath arrived here for battle—do 
thou offer him fight." Or say "I have been defeated." Do 
thou follow one of these extremes.' Hearing those words 
that Rākshasa proceeded towards the sun and beheld two 
gate-keepers—Pingala and Dandi by name. And 
communicating unto them the resolution of Rāvana he stood there 
silent, being over-powered with the rays of the sun. And 
approaching the sun, Dandi communicated unto him all this. 
Hearing of Rāvana's intention from Dandi the intelligent 
sun—the enemy of night—wisely said to him—'Do thou 
proceed, O Dandi; either defeat Rāvana or tell him "I have 
been defeated." Do whatever thou wishest.' Hearing those 
words he approached the high-souled Rākshasa and 
communicated unto him what the sun had said. Hearing the words 
of Dandi the lord of Rākshasas trumpeted his own victory 
and went away." 

SECTION XXVI. 
`````````````

"Having spent the night on the picturesque summit of 
the mount Meru and thinking (for some time) the powerful 
lord of Lankā went to the region of the moon. (And 
he saw a person) proceeding, seated on a car, sprinkled with 
heavenly unguents and attended upon by Apsarās. And 
worn out with the satisfaction of desire he was being kissed 
there. Seeing such a person his curiosity was greatly excited. 
And beholding a Rishi there he said to him—'Welcome thou 
art, O celestial saint. Indeed thou hast come at a proper 
season. Who is this shameless wight that is going seated 
on a car and attended by Apsarās? Does he not perceive 
his object of fear?' Being thus addressed by Rāvana, Parvata 
said—'O my child, O thou gifted with great intellect—Hear 
I shall describe to thee the truth. By him all the worlds 
have been conquered and Brahmā hath been propitiated 
And he is now proceeding to that excellent region full of 
bliss for obtaining final liberation. As all the worlds have 
been conquered by thee by virtue of thy asceticism, O lord of 
Rākshasas, so is he going, undoubtedly performing many pious 
actions and drinking Soma juice. O foremost of Rākshasas, 
thou art heroic, and hast truth for thy prowess. The powerful 
are never offended with the pious.' Thereupon he espied an 
excellent, huge car, filled with all radiance and effulgence and 
the sound of musical instruments and singing. (And Rāvana 
said)—'O great Rishi, who is that person, gifted with great 
effulgence, who goeth surrounded by charming songsters, 
dancing-girls and Kinnaras?' Hearing his words Parvata, 
the foremost of saints, again said—'He is heroic and a great 
warrior—he never returneth unsuccessful from a battle-field. 
Having performed many heroic feats in battle, and slain many 
enemies, he hath been assailed with many wounds in fighting 
and hath renounced his life for his master. Having destroyed 
many in battle, he hath at last been slain by his enemies and 
is perhaps now going either to the region of Indra or to some 
such place. This best of men is now being entertained by 
these well-versed in the art of singing and dancing.' 

"Rāvana again said—'Who goeth there effulgent like 
unto the sun?' Hearing the words of Rāvana, Parvata 
said—'The person, resembling the full moon and wearing 
diverse ornaments and cloths, whom thou beholdest, O great 
king, in the golden car abounding in Apasaras, distributed 
gold. He, gifted with great effulgence, is now going in a 
swift-coursing car.' Hearing the words of Parvata, Rāvana 
said—'O foremost of Rishis, do thou tell me, who, of these 
kings going, if prayed for, may offer me the hospitality of a 
battle? For sooth thou art my father; do thou point out (such 
a man to me) O thou conversant with piety.' Being thus 
addressed, Parvata again said to Rāvana—'O great king, all 
these kings wish for heaven not for battle. I shall point 
out such a man, O great one, as shall enter into conflict with 
thee. There is a highly powerful king—the lord of seven 
islands, well known by the name of Māndhāta; he shall 
enter into an encounter with thee.' Hearing the words of 
Parvata, Rāvana again said—'Do thou tell me, O thou of 
great devotion, where this king resides. I shall go where lives 
this foremost of men.' Hearing the words of Rāvana, the 
sage again said—'The son of Yuvanaswha hath conquered 
the world consisting of seven islands begining with the 
sea; Māndhāta, the foremost of kings, is just coming to 
meet him.' Thereupon (Rāvana) having long arms, proud 
of the boon conferred upon him in the three worlds, beheld the 
heroic Māndhāta, the lord of Ayodhyā and the foremost of 
kings. The king of seven islands proceeded in a golden and 
well-painted car resplendant like that of Mahendra, shining in his 
beauty and sprinkled with celestial unguents. The 
Ten-necked demon said to him—'Do thou give me battle.' 
Being thus addressed, he, laughing, said to the ten-necked 
demon—'If thy life is not dear unto thee, do thou fight with 
me, O Rākshasa.' Hearing the words of Māndhāta, Rāvana 
said—'Rāvana did not experience any affliction from Varuna 
Kuvera or Yama; why should he experience fear from thee, 
who art a man?' Having said this, the lord of Rākshasas 
as if burning in ire, ordered the Rākshasas irrepressible in 
battle. Thereupon the ministers of the vicious-souled 
Rāvana, highly enraged and well-skilled in warfare, began 
to make a downpour of arrows. Thereupon the highly 
powerful king Māndhāta, with sharpened shafts, assailed 
Prahasta, Suka, Sārana, Mahodara, Birupaksha, Akampana 
and other foremost heroes. Prahasta covered the king with 
his arrows—but before they had approached him, that foremost 
of men shattered them into pieces. Like unto fire burning 
down grass, the host of Rākshasas were burnt down by the 
king Māndhāta by means of hundreds of *Bhushundis*, *Vallas*, 
*Vindipālās* and *Tomaras*. As Kartikeya, the son of fire, 
sundered the mount Krauncha with his shafts so Māndhāta, 
enraged, pierced Prahasta with five *Tomaras* gifted with 
great velocity. Then hurling his mace again and again 
resembling that of Yama, he struck, vehemently, Rāvana's car 
therewith. That club, resembling the lightning, vehemently 
descended (upon Rāvana's car) and Rāvana, like Sakra's banner, 
was speedily upset by that. Like unto the rising of the 
waters of the salt ocean on the full moon, the king Māndhāta's 
joy and strength were greatly increased. Thereupon the 
entire Rākshasa host, emitting loud cries, stood encircling on 
all sides the lord of Rākshasas. Thereat speedily regaining 
his sense, Rāvana, a terror unto all people, the lord of Lankā, 
greatly assailed the person of Māndhāta. And beholding 
that king in a swoon, the highly powerful night-rangers were 
greatly delighted and emitted leonine roars. Regaining his 
sense in a moment the king of Ayodhyā beheld his enemy 
worshipped by the courtiers and night-rangers. He was 
instantly worked up with ire; and assuming a person 
resplendant like that of the sun and the moon he began to slay the 
Rākshasa host with a dreadful downpour of shafts. With 
his arrows and the noise thereof the entire Rākshasa army 
were overwhelmed like the agitated deep. Thereupon there 
arose a dreadful conflict between men and demons. And 
those two heroic, high-souled and foremost of men and 
Rākshasas seated on warriors' seats and holding bow and 
daggers entered (the field). And possessed by great anger 
they began to assail one another with shafts—Māndhāta 
Rāvana and he again the king. They, being assailed by one 
another, were both wounded. And setting the Raudra shaft 
upon his bow Rāvana discharged it and Māndhāta baffled it 
by means of his fiery shafts. The Ten-necked demon took 
up the Gandharva weapon and the king Māndhāta the 
Brahmā-weapon striking terror unto all. Rāvana then took up the 
celestial Pāsupata weapon, dreadful and increasing the fright 
of the three worlds, obtained by him from Rudra by virtue of 
his rigid penances. Seeing this all animals, mobile and 
immobile, were stricken with terror. Thereupon trembled 
all the three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile 
beings—the celestials and all the serpents became inert. Being 
apprised (of this conflict) by virtue of meditation the two 
foremost of ascetics Pulastya and Gālava remonstrated with 
them in many a way and prevented the king (Māndhāta) and 
the foremost of Rākshasas. Thereupon that man and demon 
being reconciled with one another went back by the ways 
they had respectively come." 

SECTION XXVII. 
``````````````

"Those two brahmans having departed, Rāvana, the lord 
of Rākshasas, proceeded, at first, by the aerial way, ten 
thousand leagues, He then went lo the excellent upper aerial 
region where live perpetually ganders gifted with many 
accomplishments. The extent thereof is also counted by ten 
thousand leagues and there are stationed closely three classes 
of clouds [#]_ namely Agneya, Pakshaja and Brahma. He, then 
proceeded to the third excellent aerial region where 
perpetually reside the high-minded Siddhas and Charanas and the 
extent whereof is also ten thousand leagues. O slayer of 
enemies, he then speedily proceeded to the fourth aerial 
region where perpetually dwelt the goblins and Vinayakas, 
He quickly went to the fifth aerial region which also extends 
over ten thousand *yojanas* where exist Ganga, the foremost of 
rivers, and the elephants headed by Kumuda, who pour down 
waters. They sport in the waters of the Ganges and pour 
down her holy waters. And those waters, parched by the 
rays of the sun and softened by the wind, pour down holy 
waters and dews, O Rāghava, Thereupon that Rākshasa 
went to the sixth aerial region, O thou gifted with high 
radiance, which also extends over ten thousand *yojanas* and 
where dwells Garuda perpetually respected of his kinsmen 
and friends. He then went to the seventh aerial region which 
is ten thousand leagues above and where dwell the seven 
Rishis. And again going up ten thousand leagues he reached 
the eighth aerial region where Ganga, known as the Ganges 
of the sky, having strong currents and sending high roars, 
and upheld by air, is situated on the sun's way. I shall now 
describe the region higher than that where resides the moon, 
and the extent whereof is counted by eighty thousand leagues. 
There dwells the moon encircled by stars and planets from 
whom proceed hundreds and thousands of rays which light up 
the worlds and conduce to the pleasure of all animals. 
Thereupon beholding the Ten-necked demon the moon as if 
burnt (him) down speedily with his cold fiery rays. And 
stricken with the fear of those rays his councillors could not 
stand them. Thereupon exclaiming his victory Prahasta said 
to Rāvana—'O king, we are destroyed by cold, so we must 
go away from here. The Rākshasas have been terrified by 
the rays of the moon; O foremost of kings, the cold rays of 
the moon have the natural property of fire in them.' 
Hearing the words of Prahasta, Rāvana, beside himself with wrath, 
having uplifted his bow and twanged it, began to assail him with 
*Narachas*. Thereupon Brahmā came speedily to the region 
of the moon and said—'O Ten-necked one, O thou having 
mighty arms, O direct son of Visravas, O gentle one, do thou 
repair hence speedily—do not oppress the moon—(for) 
this highly effulgent king of twice-born ones wisheth 
well-being unto all. I shall communicate to thee a mystical 
incantation; He who recollects it at the time of death, does 
not come by it.' Being thus addressed the ten-necked 
demon, with folded hands, said—'If thou art pleased with me 
O god! O lord of the worlds, O thou of great penances, if 
dost thou wish to communicate that incantation, do thou 
impart it upon me, O thou of great piety; reciting which, O 
great one, I may be released of the fear of the celestials. 
Forsooth, by thy favour, O lord of the celestials, I shall 
be invincible by all the Asuras, Dānavas and birds.' Being 
thus accosted Brahmā said to the ten-necked demon—'O 
lord of Rākshasas, do thou recite it at the time of death and 
not every day. Taking a string of beads, thou shouldst recite 
this holy incantation, on which, thou, O lord of Rashasas, 
shalt be invincible, And if dost thou not recite it thou shalt 
not meet with success. Hear, I shall communicate to thee 
the incantation, O foremost of Rākshasas, reciting which 
thou shalt obtain victory in the encounter, "Salutation unto 
thee, god, O lord of gods, O thou worshipped of the 
celestials and Asuras, O thou identical with past and future, 
great god, O thou having red eyes—thou art a boy at 
thou assumest the form of an old man; thou wearest tiger 
skin. O god, thou art worthy of being worshipped, and the 
lord of the three worlds. Thou art Hara, Haritanemi, 
Yugantadahaka and Valadeva. Thou art Ganesha, 
Loka-Sambhu, Lokapala, and of huge arms; thou art great, the 
holder of a huge dart, having dreadful teeth, and the greatest 
of gods. Thou art time, the strength and hast blue neck and
a large belly; thou art the destroyer of the celestials—the 
foremost of the ascetics and the lord of all created beings. 
Thou art the holder of a dart and hast the bull as thy
emblem, art the leader, protector, the destroyer and the
preserver; thou hast beared locks, art Mundi, Sikhandi, hast 
a crown, and art greatly illustrious. Thou art the lord of 
sprites and goblins, the soul of all, the protector of all, 
omniscient, the destroyer of all, the creator and the eternal
preceptor. Thou art lord, carriest a *kamandalu* [#]_ in thy hand,
art the holder of a Pinaka [#]_ and Dhurjati [#]_ thou art, worthy
of veneration, the most excellent OM, the first chanter of 
Saman, the death, the element of death, Parijātra [#]_ and 
observant of penances. Thou art an ascetic, livest in a cave 
and carriest a Vinā, [#]_ Panava, [#]_ and quiver in thy hands; 
thou art immortal and art like the newly-risen sun to behold. 
Thou livest in a cremation ground, art the illustrious lord of 
Umā, and above all blemishes Thou didst uproot-the eyes of 
Vagadeva and teeth of Pushā. Thou art the destroyer of 
fever, holdest mace in thy hand and art (the very) dissolution 
and time. Thou hast got a fire-brand in thy mouth, hast fire 
as thy emblem, art highly resplendent and lord of men. 
Thou art mad, makest people tremble, art the fourth, and 
most respected of men; thou art a dwarf, Vāmanadeva and 
the dwarf who circumambulates the east. Thou art a beggar, 
wearest the semblance of a beggar and art by nature 
crooked; thou didst assail Indra's hands and the Vasus. 
Thou art the season, the maker of seasons, time, honey and 
hast honeyed eyes. Thou art a tree bearing fruits and 
blossoms, hast arrows as thy seat and worshipped by people 
of all conditions perpetually. Thou art the protector and the 
creator of the universe, the Purusha, eternal and certain; the 
lord of all religions, Virupāksha, the three qualities and the 
protector of all beings. Thou art three-eyed, assumest many 
forms and brilliant as the *Ajuta* suns; thou art the lord of 
all celestials, the foremost deity and wearest bearded locks 
having the impressions of the moon; thou art connected with 
Brahman, worthy of being resorted to and identical with all 
created beings. Thou blowest all bugles, severest all ties; 
thou dost charm and bind (all) and dost always bring about death. 
Thou hast flowery teeth, art a division, the foremost and the 
destroyer of all; thou hast dreadful beards, holdest a bow, 
art fearful and gifted with dreadful might." These eight 
hundred holy and excellent names have been uttered by me 
which remove all iniquities, are holy and afford shelter to 
those who seek for it; if do thou recite them, O ten-necked 
one, thou shalt be able to destroy thy enemies.'" 

.. [#] The three classes are (1) *Agnija* or produced from fire (2) *Pakshaja* or produced in a fortnight (3) *Brāhma* or produced from Brahma. 

.. [#] An earthen or wooden water pot used by the ascetic and religious student.

.. [#] The bow of Siva, A trident or three-pronged spear.

.. [#] A name of Siva from *dhur*, a burden and *Jati*, a collection; who collects or bears the burthen of the three worlds. 

.. [#] The name of a mountain, apparently the central or western portion of the *Vindhya* chain. 

.. [#] A kind of stringed musical instrument. 

.. [#] A sort of musical instrument; a small drum or tabor. 

SECTION XXVIII. 
```````````````

"Having conferred this boon upon Rāvana the 
father, sprung from lotus, speedily returned to the region of
Brahman. And having obtained the boon Rāvana too came
back. After a few days that Rākshasa Rāvana, the dread of 
all people, arrived at the banks of the western Ocean with 
his councillors. And on the island a person was seen bright as 
fire under the name of Mahajambunada, seated there alone. 
He had a dreadful figure and was like unto the fire at 
dissolution. And beholding that highly powerful person 
amongst men like unto the chief of gods amongst the celestials, 
the moon amongst the planets, the lion amongst the Sarabhas, [#]_ 
the Airavata amongst the elephants, the Meru amongst the 
mountains, and the Pārijāta amongst the trees, the ten-necked 
demon said—'Give me battle.' Thereat his eyes became 
agitated like unto planets and from the clashing of his teeth 
there arose a sound like the clapping of thunder-bolts. And 
the highly powerful Dasānana too roared with his councillors. 
And with darts, *Saktis*, *Rishtis* and *Patticas* he again and 
again assailed that highly effulgent person, having long arms, 
a dreadful appearance, huge teeth, a grim figure, a conch-like 
neck, spacious breast, a belly like that of a frog, a countenance 
like that of a lion, legs like the mount Kailāsa, red palms, 
red hands, emitting dreadful roars, huge-bodied, gifted with 
the velocity of mind and air, dreadful, carrying quiver, bells 
and chowries, encircled by a burning flame and emitting a 
sweet note as a net-work of *Kinkini* does, having a garland 
of golden lotuses hung round his neck, appearing graceful 
like unto the Rig-Veda, be-decked with lotus garlands, 
resembling the Anjana and golden mountains. As the 
lion is not moved by the attack of a wolf, the elephant by 
that of a bull, the Sumeru by the king of serpents and the 
great Ocean by the current of a river, so that great person was 
not agitated and said to the ten-necked demon—'O 
vicious-minded night-ranger, I shall soon remove they desire for a 
battle.' O Rāma, the might of that person was a thousand 
times greater than that of Rāvana which was dreadful unto 
all the worlds. Piety and asceticism, which are at the root 
of attaining to every thing in the world, are at his thighs; 
Cupid is his male organ, the Viswadevas are at his waist 
and the Maruts are at the sides of his *Basti*; the Vasus are in 
the middle portion of his body, the oceans are in his belly, the 
quarters are on his sides, the Maruts are at his joints—the 
manes are one his back and the grand-father has taken shelter 
in his heart; the pious acts of making gifts of kine, gold and 
lands are his downs; the mounts Himalaya, Hemkuta, 
Mandara, and Meru are his bones; the thunder-bolt is his 
palm, the sky his body; the evening and watery clouds 
are on his neck, the creator, the preserver and the 
Vidyadharas are on his two arms. Ananta, Vasuki, Visalaksha 
Iravat, Kamvala, Aswatara, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya the 
venomous Takshaka, and Upatakshaka, have taken shelter 
under the nails of his hands, in order to vomit forth their 
venom. The fire is in his mouth, the Rudras are on his 
shoulders, the fortnights, months, years and seasons are on 
the rows of his teeth; the lunar half and the dark half of the 
month are in his nostrils—and the airy currents are in 
pores of his body. Saraswati, the goddess of words, is his
neck, the two Aswins are his ears, the sun and the moon are 
his two eyes, O Rāma, all the divisions of the Vedas, 
Yagmas, the whole host of stars, good words, energy, 
asceticism—all these are being supported by his body, assuming
the shape of a man. Thereupon that Purusha easily struck
Rāvana with his hands hard as thunder. Being assailed 
thereby Rāvana immediately fell on the ground. Beholding
that Rākshasa fallen and having distressed others that huge
person, like unto the Rig-Veda, resembling a mountain and 
be-decked with lotus garlands, entered the region under the 
earth. Rāvana addressed his councillors thus—'O Prahasta, 
O Sukasārana and other ministers, where hath that person 
suddenly gone? Do ye tell me this.' Hearing those words
of Rāvana the night-rangers said—'That man, who crusheth 
down the pride of the celestials and demons, hath entered 
hither.' 

"As Garuda goes speedily taking a serpent so that 
vicious-minded Rāvana arrived quickly at the entrance of the den. 
And Rāvana, having no fear, entered therein. And having 
entered there he saw males resembling the red collyrium, 
wearing *keyuras*, [#]_ heroic, be-decked with red garlands, 
pasted with red sandal and adorned with diverse golden  
ornaments and jewels. He saw there three millions of such 
high-minded persons, devoid of fear, pure, radiant like fire, 
dancing being mad after festivities. Beholding them the 
Ten-necked demon, of dreadful prowess, was not the least 
terrified, and rather saw their dance, standing at the gate. 
They were all like the male being he had seen before. They 
were all of the same colour, same dress, same figure and 
equally gifted with great energy. They were all gifted with 
four arms and great energy. Beholding them the down of the 
Ten-necked demon stood erect though a boon had been 
conferred upon him by the Self-born and he speedily issued out 
of that place. And he again saw another huge person lying 
down on a bed. His house, seat and bed were all white and 
valuable and he was sleeping enveloped by fire. And there 
sat gracefully with a fan in her lotus hands, the goddess 
Laksmi—most beautiful in the three worlds—(as if) the 
ornament thereof, chaste, adorned with celestial garlands, sprinkled 
with excellent sandal paste, be-decked with rich ornaments 
and clad in a precious raiment. Having entered there with 
out any councillor the vicious Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, 
on beholding that chaste damsel with sweet smiles seated on 
a royal seat, being possessed by desire, grew anxious to hold 
her by the hand, as one, under the influence of death, catches 
a sleeping serpent. Beholding that lord of Rākshasas with 
loose cloth and understanding him as desirous of holding (her) 
the deity, having huge arms, asleep and enveloped with 
flames, laughed aloud. And scorched suddenly by his 
energy, Rāvana, the dread of all people, fell down on earth 
like unto an up-rooted tree. Beholding that Rākshasa fallen 
he said the following words:—'Rise up, O foremost of 
Rākshasas, thou shalt not meet with death today; thou shalt live 
and be protected, O Rākshasa, by the great Patriarch's boon. 
Do thou therefore go away, O Rāvana, with confidence—thou 
shalt not experience death just now.' Regaining his sense 
instantly Rāvana was stricken with fear. And being thus 
addressed, that enemy, of the celestials, stood up and with his 
down erect, said to that highly resplendant deity—'Who art 
thou gifted with great energy and like unto the fire of 
dissolution? Tell me, who art thou, O deity and whence thou hast 
come hither.' Being thus accosted by the vicious-souled 
Rāvana, the deity, smiling, replied in words deep as the 
muttering of clouds, saying—'What shalt thou do with me 
O ten-necked demon? Thou art not to be slain by me now.' 
Being thus addressed the Ten-necked demon, with folded 
palms said—'By the words of the Patriarch (Brahmā) I shall 
not tread the path of death; there is none born amongst men, or 
the celestials who can equal me, and disregard; by virtue of 
his prowess, the great Patriarch's boon. His words can never 
be falsified—every great exertion is weak before them; I do 
not behold any such man in the three worlds who can render 
that boon useless. O foremost of the deities, I am immortal—I 
do not fear thee; and even if I meet with death, I may have it 
from thee and no one else, O Lord. My death from thee is 
both glorious and praise-worthy.' Thereupon Rāvana, gifted 
with dreadful prowess, beheld within the body of that deity, 
all the three worlds with mobile and immobile creations. 
The Adityas, the Maruts, the Sidhas, the two Aswins, 
Rudras, the manes, Yama, Kuvera, the oceans, mountains, 
rivers, all the divisions of the Veda and knowledge, fire, 
planets, stars, sky, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Chāranas, the 
ascetics conversant with the knowledge of Vedas, Garuda 
and the serpents, the other deities, Yakshas, Daityas and 
Rākshasas, were all seen in their incorporeal forms, on the
person of that great Purusha, lying down." Thereupon the 
virtuous-souled Rāma said to Agastya, the foremost of 
Munis—"Who is that male being stationed in the island? Who
are those three *kotis* male beings? And who is this person 
who crusheth down the pride of the Daityās and Dānavas?"
Hearing Rāma's words Agastya said—"O thou existing 
eternally, O god of gods, hearken, I shall relate (it) unto thee.
The person stationed in the island is the illustrious Kapila.
All those dancing persons are the deities equalling that
intelligent Kapila in energy and power. And that Rākshasa, 
bent on sin, was not seen by him with angry looks, and 
therefore, Rāma, Rāvana, was not there and then reduced to 
ashes. And he, resembling a mountain, with his person 
pierced, fell on the ground. As a wily wight goes through a 
secret so he pierced (Rāvana's person) with his shaft-like 
words. Having regained his sense, however, after a long 
time, that Rākshasa, of great prowess, returned where his 
councillors were." 

.. [#] A fabulous animal supposed to have eight legs. 

.. [#] A kind of ornament used on arms.

SECTION XXIX. 
`````````````

"While thus returning the vicious-souled Rāvana, 
with delight, carried away stealthily, on his way, the 
daughters of the royal saints, celestials and Dānavas. 
And whatever beautiful damsel he saw, married or unmarried, 
that demon held them captive in his car, having slain all their 
friends and relatives. In this wise he got on his chariot 
many a female of the Nagas, Rakshas, Asuras, Yakshas, 
Dānavas and of men. And they, all afflicted, shed tears, hot 
as firey flames, caused by fear and fire of grief. As the ocean 
is filled with the currents of the rivers so that car was flooded 
with their tears originating from fear and sorrow. And wept 
there in the chariot, hundreds of the females of Nagas, 
Gandharvas, of great ascetics, Daityas and of Dānavas. They 
had long airs, graceful persons, countenances resembling the 
full-moon, rising breast, slender waist like that of a black-bee 
and were graceful with back like the pole of a car. They were 
like the females of the celestials and the burning gold and 
were all afflicted by grief, sorrow and terror and were young. 
And the car was ablaze on all sides with the sighings of those 
damsels and Pushpaka looked like the chamber where fire is 
kept perpetually. The countenance and eyes, of those 
beautiful damsels, brought under the subjection of the 
ten-necked demon, and afflicted with sorrow, looked poorly like 
a hind attacked by a lion. Some thought—'Will he eat me 
up?' and another, stricken with sorrow, thought—'Will he 
destroy me?' Thus remembering their mothers, fathers, 
husbands and brothers, all those females, overwhelmed with 
grief and sorrow, bewailed, some exclaiming—'What shall 
befall my son in my absence? Alas! into what ocean of 
grief my mother or brother is sunk? Alas! what shall my 
husband do in my absence? Therefore, O death, I propitiate
thee, do thou take me, who am subject to miseries. Alas! 
what an iniquity did I perpetrate in my former birth in 
another body? Therefore, we all, overwhelmed with grief,
are sunk in the ocean of sorrow—and I do not behold the end
of my miseries. Oh! fie upon humanity; there is none more
vile than a man for they are weak. As the stars disappear 
with the rising of the sun in time, so our husbands have been 
destroyed by the powerful Rāvana. Oh! highly powerful is 
this Raksha and he is mad after devising the means of 
destruction. Alas! being engaged in such vile actions, he does not 
consider himself cursed; he is as powerful as he is vicious.
And though the ravishment of another's wife is a greats sin, 
still that vile Rākshasa is enjoying us who belong to others.
Therefore this vicious-minded one shall meet with death, by 
his own actions.' As soon as these words were uttered by those 
chaste damsels, bugles were sounded in heaven and flowery 
showers fell on earth. Being thus imprecated by those chaste 
females, devoted to their husbands, he became shorn of energy 
and effulgence and appeared like one divested of mind.
Hearing their lamentations thus and being honored by the 
night-rangers that foremost of Rākshasas entered his city
Lankā. In the interval, Rāvana's sister, a dreadful and 
grim-visaged she-demon, suddenly fell down on the ground. And 
having raised up his sister and consoled her Rāvana 
said—'Tell me speedily, O good sister, what you wish to say.' 
Thereat that she-demon, having blood-red eyes, closed with 
tears, said:—'O king, by thee, powerful as thou art, I have 
forcibly been made a widow. Fourteen thousand demons, 
under the name of Kalakeyas, have been destroyed by thee, 
O king, in the battle and amongst them was my highly 
powerful husband—dearer than my life. He has been slain by 
thee, O dear one, an enemy—a brother only in name. I have 
been killed by thee, O king, who art my brother. For thee, 
king, I shall enjoy the word 'widow'! [#]_ My husband [#]_ 
should have been saved by thee in the battle. But he was 
slain by thy ownself in the battle; art thou not ashamed of 
this?' Being thus addressed by his bewailing sister, the 
Ten-necked demon, consoling her in sweet words, said:—'Of no 
avail is thy lamentation, dear sister; thou needst not be afraid 
of any of thy relatives. I shall please thee studiously by gifts, 
honors and favours. Being mad after war-fare and desirous of 
acquiring victory, I was continually making a downpour of shafts, 
so I could not distinguish in the conflict between my own men 
and enemies,—and thus unwittingly I did hurt thy husband. 
And thus, sister, thy husband was slain by me in the conflict; 
I shall now do whatever shall conduce to thy well-being. Do 
thou ever reside by the side of thy rich brother Khara and 
he shall be the lord of fourteen thousand Rākshasas. That 
highly powerful one shall give food and clothes to all those 
Rākshasas. He is thy cousin and that night-ranger shall 
always carry out thy orders. Let that hero now speedily go 
to protect the Dandaka forest and the highly powerful 
Dushana shall be the commander of his forces. And the 
heroic Khara shall always obey thy words and be the lord of 
Rākshasas assuming shapes at will.' Having said this the 
Ten-necked demon issued orders to his army—fourteen 
thousand highly powerful Rākshasas. Being encircled by those 
grim-visaged Rākshasas, Khara, undaunted, speedily came to 
the Dandaka forest. There he governed without thorns and 
Surpanakha too also resided in the forest of Dandaka." 

.. [#] This is the literal translation of the passage—*i.e.* for thee, I shall for ever be known as widow. 

.. [#] The word in the text is *Jāmata*, which literally means *son-in-law*—but here perhaps it must mean husband for she was his sister. 

SECTION XXX. 
````````````

"Having thus given the command of a huge and 
dreadful army to Khara and consoled his sister the Ten-necked 
demon was satisfied and freed from anxiety. Thereupon 
that highly powerful lord of Rākshasas with his followers 
entered an excellent garden in Lankā named Nikumbhilā. 
And there, he saw, filled with hundreds of sacrificial posts 
and altars, a sacrifice being celebrated, as if burning in its 
lustre. And he beheld his fearful son Meghnāda too, clad in
an antelope skin and holding *Sikhā* and *Kamandalu*. Having 
seen him (there) and embraced him by his arms the lord of 
Lankā said:—'What are you after, O my child? Tell me 
the truth.' Thereupon that foremost of twice-born ones 
Usanas [#]_ of austere penances, wishing the prosperity of the 
sacrifice, said to Rāvana—the Rākshasa chief:—'Hear, I shall 
relate to thee everything, O king; thy son hath met with 
the fruits of many a sacrifice—Agnistoma, [#]_ Asvamedha, [#]_ 
Bahusubarnaka, [#]_ Rajsuya, [#]_ Goinedha, [#]_ and Baisnaba. [#]_ And 
being engaged in this Mahesvvara sacrifice, which is incapable 
of being celebrated by men, thy son hath obtained boon from 
Pasupati [#]_ himself. 

"'He has also obtained illusory powers—which create darkness 
or ignorance—namely of ranging in the sky, of being eternal, 
of ascending a celestial car which courses at will and of creating 
darkness. O lord of Rākshasas, these illusory powers being 
used in a conflict, even the celestials and Asuras shall not 
be able to perceive his course. Besides he has obtained a 
quiver, the arrows whereof shall never be exhausted, a bow, 
which is hard of being got by and a dreadful weapon which 
destroys enemies in a conflict. Having obtained these boons 
thy son, O thou having ten faces, and myself, the sacrifice 
being finished, have been waiting to behold thee.' Whereto 
the Ten-necked demon replied—'You have not done well 
as you have worshipped, with diverse articles my 
enemies—Indra and others. However, what is done is done; there is 
virtue in this—no doubt; come, O gentle one, we shall go to our 
house.' Thereupon going there with his son and Bibhishana, 
the Ten-necked demon got down all those damsels, speechless 
with tears, gifted with auspicious marks, the precious females of 
the celestials, Dānavas and Raskshasas. Perceiving his vicious 
desire for those damsels, the virtuous-souled (Bibhishana) 
said:—'Thou dost (still) follow thy own whims, knowing that 
people are injured by these actions which destroy piety, 
wealth and fame. Having slain their kinsmen thou hast 
brought these beautiful damsels hither, but disregarding thee, 
O king, Madhu hath carried away Kumbhanasi.' 
Rāvana said:—'I do not understand all this. Who is that 
Madhu, who has been named by thee?' Worked up with ire 
Bibhishana said to his brother:—'Hear, the fruit of thy vicious 
actions hath arrived. There was an old Rākshasa, celebrated 
for his wisdom, named Malyavān, the elder brother of Sumālin, 
our maternal grandfather. His grand-daughter is 
Kumbhanashi and is born of our maternal aunt Analā; so she is 
virtually our sister. Thy son being engaged in the sacrifice 
and myself being under waters she was stolen away, O king, 
by the powerful Rākshasa Madhu. Kumbhakarna, O great 
king, was then asleep. Having slain all the powerful 
Rākshasas and thy councillors, he had stolen her away, O king, who 
was in thy inner apartments. Hearing this even, O great 
king, we have pardoned and not slain him: an unmarried girl 
should be given away to her husband by her brothers, but 
that has not been the case—this is merely the result of thy
vicious actions—wicked-minded as thou art, And this thou
hast met with instantly—so the people say.' Hearing the
words of Bibhishana, Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, became 
agitated like an ocean, by the recollection of his vicious 
deeds. And enraged, with blood-red eyes the ten-necked 
demon said—'Get my chariot ready soon and let all the
heroes of our party be prepared. Let my brother 
Kumbhakarna and other leading night-rangers, armed with various 
weapons, ascend their conveyances. Having slain today in 
the encounter that Madhu, who is not afraid of Rāvana, I
shall, encircled by my friends, and desirous of battle, proceed 
to the region of the celestials.' Thereupon issued out for 
battle leading Rākshasas four thousand Akshauhini strong 
taking various weapons. Commanding them Indrajit preceded 
the army, Rāvana went in the middle and Kumbhakarna 
was in the rear; the virtuous-souled Bibhisana remained 
in Lankā, being engaged in pious observances. And the 
rest of the leading Rākshasas proceeded towards the city 
of Madhu. And all the Rākshasas went covering the sky, 
some on asses, some on camels, some on horses, some on 
quick-coursing porpoises and some on huge serpents. And 
beholding Rāvana proceed, hundreds of Daityas, inimical 
to the celestials, followed him. Having arrived at the city 
Of Madhu and entered there the ten-necked demon did 
not behold Madhu but espied his sister. Thereupon being 
afraid of the king of Rākshasas, Kumbheenashi, with folded 
palms, touched his feet with her crown. Having 
raised her up the Rākshasa-chief Rāvana said 'No 
fear, what can I do for you?' Whereto she replied—'O king, 
O thou having long arms,—if thou art pleased with me, do 
not slay my husband to-day, O conferrer of honours. It is 
said there is no other fear like this for damsels of high 
pedigree. The greatest of fears is that of being a widow. Be 
thou truthful, O king of kings—do thou look towards me, 
who am thus begging; Thou hast thyself said, O king; "No 
fear."' Being thus addressed Rāvana said to his sister 
there:—'Do thou tell me speedily where is thy husband. I shall go 
with him for conquests to the region of the celestials. Out 
of pity and love for thee I refrain from slaying Madhu.' 
Being thus accosted; that Rākshasi, being pleased, got her
sleeping husband, the night-ranger, up and said:—'Here is 
my brother, the highly power Daçagriva. Being desirous 
of conquering the region of the celestials he prays for thy 
help. Do thou therefore proceed to his help, O Rākshasa, 
with all they friends; It behoves thee to help him, who out 
of affection for me, hath prayed for thy help.' Hearing 
those words Madhu said:—'So be it.' And approaching a 
little he beheld that foremost of Rākshasas and duly welcomed 
Rāvana. Being thus honoured the highly power Daçagriva 
spent one night in Madhu's house and then, addressed 
himself for departure. Thereupon reaching the hill Kailāça, 
the abode of Baisravan, the lord of Rākshasas, resembling 
Mahendra, encamped his army." 

.. [#] Another name of Sukra. Indrajit took the vow of silence so he thought it improper to disturb him. 

.. [#] A sacrifice or rather a series of offerings to fire for five days to be celebrated in the spring. 

.. [#] The actual or emblematic sacrifice of a horse, this sacrifice is one of the highest order, and performed a hundred times, entitles the sacrificer to the dominion of Swarga or *paradise*. 

.. [#] A sacrifice in which profuse gifts of gold are made. 

.. [#] A sacrifice in which all the tributary chiefs pay homage to the Lord Paramount. 

.. [#] The offering or sacrifice of a cow.

.. [#] A sacrifice relating to Vishnu.

.. [#] A name of Siva. 

SECTION XXXI. 
`````````````

"After sunset the highly power Rāvana encamped his
army there. And the clear moon, brilliant as the mountain, 
having risen, that huge army, armed with diverse weapons, 
became asleep. And lying down on the summit of the mountain, 
the highly powerful Rāvana espied the caves beautified with
the rays of the moon and the trees. And the interior of the 
forest was beautified with the brilliant groves of Karnikar, with 
Kadamba and Vakula trees, groves of full blown lotuses, the
waters of Mandākini, with Champaka, Asoka, Punnaga, 
Mandāra, mangoe, Pātala, Lodra, Pryangu, Arjuna, 
Ketaka, Tagara, Coconut, Pyāla, Panasa and 
various other trees. And there sang the Kinnaras, 
possessed by desire, and having sweet voice, enhancing the 
delight of the mind. And there danced mirthfully, with their 
damsels, the Vidyadharas, inebriete and having their eyes
reddened with drink. There was audible in the house of 
the lord of riches, the sweet music of the assembled 
Apsarās like unto the sound of the bell. And being shaken by 
the wind the nectar-smelling trees made the hill fragrance 
with the shower of flowers. And carrying the fragrance
rendered salutary with honey and filaments of flowers, the 
excellent wind blew enhancing Rāvana's desire. Being 
possessed by desire through songs, richness of flowers, coldness 
of air, beauty of the hills, and the rising of the moon in
night, the highly powerful Rāvana espied again and again 
the moon with heavy sighs. At this time passed by that way 
the foremost of Apsarās, Rambhā, adorned with excellent 
ornaments and having a countenance like the full moon. Her 
person was sprinkled with excellent sandal paste—her hairs 
were decked with Mandāra flowers—her body was beautified 
with other flowers and her movements tended to increase 
desire. Her eyes were beautiful and her waist was high, 
adorned with Mekhala [#]_ and was as if the refuge of Rati [#]_. 
Her forehead and other parts of the countenance were 
painted with the marks of red sandal and adorned with 
ornaments of flowers growing in six seasons. Rambhā 
appeared like second Sree, in grace and beauty, natural and 
artificial. She wore green clothes resembling the clouds; her 
face was like the moon, eye brows like excellent bows, thighs 
like the trunks of elephants and palms soft as leaves. She 
was seen by Rāvana as proceeding in the midst of soldiers. 
Having got up and been influenced by lust he took her, 
shameful as she was, by the hand and smiling 
said:—'Where art thou going, O beautiful damsel? Whom art 
thou going of thy own accord to satisfy? Whose prosperous 
time hath appeared, with whom thou shalt enjoy? Who 
shall be satisfied with drinking the nectar of thy mouth 
smelling like lotus? Whose breast, O fair damsel, 
thy rising breast beautiful like two golden pots closely 
placed, shall touch? Who is there so beautiful as I—Indra, 
Vishnu, or two Aswins that thou art passing by me? Do thou 
take rest upon this excellent rock, O thou having charming 
waist. There is no other lord, save me, in the three worlds. 
And Daçānana, the lord of the lords of the three worlds, 
thus begs thee, with folded palms. Do thou therefore seek 
me.' Being thus addressed, Rambhā, trembling, with folded 
palms, said:—'Be thou propitiated; it doth not behove thee 
to speak thus, who art my superior. Rather shouldst thou 
protect me if any body else trieth to oppress me. Virtually 
I am thy daughter-in-law. I speak to thee the truth.' 
Thereupon the Ten-necked demon said to her, standing with her 
face downwards, and her down standing erect at his very 
sight. 'Hadst thou been the wife of my son, thou 
wouldst have been my daughter-in-law.' Whereto Rambhā
replied:—'Truely it is; I am, by virtue, the wife of thy 
son, O foremost of Rākshasas. Thy brother Vaisrabana 
hath a son, dearer than his life, celebrated in the three 
worlds under the name of Nalakuvara, In virtue he is 
unto a Brahmin, in prowess he equals a Kshatriya, in anger
he is very fire and in patience he is like the earth. I 
been thus directed by that Lokapāla's son. For him I
have adorned my person with these ornaments. I am not 
attached to any body else but him. O king, O slayer of 
foes, by virtue of (this relation) it behoveth thee to save 
me. And that virtuous-souled one is anxiously expecting 
me. Thou shouldst not put obstacle in that; it behoveth thee 
to let me go; do thou, O foremost of Rākshasas, wend the 
way treaded by the pious. Thou art worthy of being revered 
by me and I am an object of thy protection.' Being thus 
addressed Daçagriva humbly replied:—'"I am 
daughter-in-law," as thou hast said, is worthy of being said by one 
who is the only wife. This is the everlasting law of the 
celestials that the Apsarās have no husband; they cannot 
be the wife of one husband.' Having said this, the Raksha 
ravished her. Being released from his grasp Rambhā became 
divested of her ornaments and garland and became like the 
river agitated by the elephants. Her hairs were dishevelled 
and her hands were trembling. Like unto a blossoming 
creeper shaken by the wind, she, trembling and bashful 
and with folded hands, went to Nalakuvara and fell
down at his feet. Having seen her in that plight the 
high-souled Nalakuvara said—'O fair one, what is this? Why 
hast thou placed thyself at my feet?' Sighing heavily 
and trembling she, with folded palms, related to him 
everything from the beginning to the end. 'O lord, on his way to 
heaven, Daçagriva hath arrived here and hath spent the 
night with his army. While I was coming to thee, O slayer 
of foes, I was seen by him. Then holding me he said—"Where 
art thou going?" I related to him everything truly. But 
being possessed by lust he did not pay heed to my words. 
He was again prayed by me, O lord, saying "I am thy 
daughter-in-law." But neglecting that he ravished me. O 
thou of firm vows, it behoveh thee to forgive me for this 
folly. O gentle one, a woman's strength can never 
equal that of a man.' Hearing of this ravishment 
Vaisravana's son was greatly enraged and entered into 
meditation. Having ascertained the truth within a moment 
Vaisravana's son, with eyes reddened with ire, took water 
in his palms. Having taken this and rinsed his mouth duly, 
he imprecated a dreadful curse upon that lord of Rākshasas. 
'O fair one, since thou hast been ravished by him despite 
thy unwillingness he shall never be able to get by an 
unwilling damsel. Whenever he shall, stricken by lust, 
ravish a reluctant damsel, his head shall be sundered into 
seven pieces'. As soon as this curse, like unto a burning 
flame, was uttered, the celestial bugles were sounded and 
a shower of flowers fell from heavens. Being apprised of 
the plight of people (brought about by him) and of the 
death of that Rākshasa the patriarch Brahmā and other 
gods were greatly delighted. Hearing of that curse capable 
of making the down erect, Daçagriva abstained from 
entertaining lust for unwilling females. And hearing of the curse 
imprecated by Nalakuvara all the chaste damsels, that were 
kept captive, attained to great delight." 

.. [#] A kind of ornament used on the waist. 

.. [#] Wife of Kama—the god of love in Hindu mythlogy. 

SECTION XXXII. 
``````````````

"Having crossed the mount Kailāça, the highly powerful 
Ten-necked demon, with his army, reached the region of 
Indra. And there arose in the region of celestials an uproar 
from the Rākshasa army, like unto the sound of the agitated 
deep. Hearing of the arrival of Rāvana, Indra shook on his 
throne and said to the assembled gods, Adityas, Vasus, 
Rudras, Sadhyas and Maruts—'Prepare yourselves, for 
fighting with the vicious-souled Rāvana.' Being thus 
addressed by Sakra, the celestials, his equals in the encounter 
and gifted with great prowess, armed themselves for fight. 
And Mahendra, afraid of Rāvana, poorly went to Vishnu and 
gave vent to the following accents:—'How shall I, O Vishnu, 
withstand, the Rākshasa Rāvana? The highly powerful 
Rākshasa hath come here for battle. It is by virtue of the 
boon that he is powerful, not for anything else. It is proper 
to make the words uttered by Brahmā, truthful. As resorting 
to thy prowess I destroyed Namuchi, Yitra, Bali, Nānrin 
and Samvara, so do thou make some arrangements (for his 
destruction). There is no other excellent refuge but thee in 
the three worlds, mobile and immobile, O lord, O god of gods, 
O slayer of Madhu. Thou art the graceful, ever-existing 
Nārāyana, having a lotus navel. By thee the worlds have 
been settled and myself and Sakra, the lord of the celestials. 
Thou hast created the three worlds, the mobile and immobile 
and in thee all these shall, O glorious deity, end at the time
of dissolution. Do thou tell me, the truth, O god of gods, 
that I may myself fight; or do thou, with thy sword and 
discus, vanquish Rāvana.' Being thus addressed by Sakra 
the lord Nārāyana; said:—'Do not fear, hear what I say.
He is invincible by virtue of the boon, and that vicious-souled
one is incapable of being vanquished even by the celestials 
and Asuras. Irrepressible by virtue of his prowess, that 
Rākshasa, with his son, shall accomplish a mighty object. 
O lord of celestials, even if I am requested by thee, I shall 
not withstand the Rākshasa, Rāvana in the conflict. Without 
slaying the enemies in the encounter, Vishnu doth never go 
back—but it is hard to fulfill my desire from Rāvana, well 
protected by the boon. However I do promise before thee, 
O lord of the celestials, O performer of hundred sacrifices, I 
shall, soon become the cause of this Rākshasa's death. I 
shall soon destroy Rāvana with his family in due time and 
afford delight unto the celestials. I speak the truth unto 
thee, O king of the celestials, O lord of Sachi; do thou 
divested of fear, fight, O thou gifted with great strength, 
along with the celestials.' Thereupon having issued out of 
the city, Rudras, Adityas, Vusus, Maruts and Aswins 
well-armed with mails, appeared before the Rākshasas. 
Meanwhile at the latter part of the night there was audible the 
uproar of Rāvana's army fighting on all sides. Having 
got up and cast their looks upon one another the highly 
powerful Rākshasas waited there for the battle, delighted. 
Thereupon beholding that inexhaustible huge army at the 
commencement of the battle the celestial host lost heart. 
Thereupon there ensued a conflict, setting up a terrible 
sound, with various weapons between the Rākshasas and 
gods. In the interval issued out for encounter the heroic 
and grim-visaged Rākshasas—Rāvana's councillors. And 
encircled by Māricha, Prahasta, Mahāparswa, Mahodara, 
Akampana, Nikumbha, Suka, Sārana, Sanghrāda, Dhumaketu, 
Mahādangstra, Gathodara, Jāmbumāli, Mahāhrada, 
Virupāksha, Suptaghna, Yajnakopa, Durmukha, Khara, Trisirā, 
Karaveerāksha, Suryyasatru Mahākāya, Atikāya, Devāntaka, 
Narāntaka,—all those gifted with great prowess, there entered 
the battle-field, the highly powerful Sumālin, Rāvana's 
maternal grandfather. And with various sharp-pointed 
weapons, he, highly angered, began to assail the celestial host 
like unto the winds scattering clouds. Being thus distressed 
by the night-rangers the host of the gods fled away into 
diverse directions like a herd of deer attacked by a lion. In 
the meantime, entered the battle-field, the heroic and brave 
Savitra, the eighth Vasu, encircled by soldiers and striking 
terror into the hearts of the enemies. And the two Adityas, 
the highly powerful Tushthā, and Pushā united and undaunted, 
entered the arena. Thereupon there arose with Rākshasas 
a terrible encounter of the celestials unable to bear their
fame in battle. Then the Rākshasas, with thousands of 
terrible weapons, began to belabour the deities in the 
encounter. And the celestials, as well, began to send the 
redoubtable, powerful and terrific Rākshasas, with the stroke 
of blameless weapons, to the abode of Death. In the interim, 
O Rāma, a Rākshasa, Sumālin, by name, getting enraged 
and with diverse weapons, ran amock of the soldiery. As 
the winds scatter clouds, so, he, under the influence of rage, 
with various sharpened weapons, committed a havoc amongst 
the celestial soldiers. Thereupon being assailed by a 
downpour of huge shafts, maces, Prāsas and diverse dreadful 
weapons, the celestials could not keep their ground upon the 
field of warfare. The celestials being thus distressed by 
Sumālin the eighth Vasu Sāvitra stood there enraged. And 
encircled by his own car-warriors that highly powerful one, 
with his prowess, repulsed the striking night-rangers. 
Thereupon there arose a terrible encounter, capable of making 
down erect, between Sumālin and the Vasu, who did not 
retire from the field of battle. His chariot drawn by 
serpents was pulled down and destroyed by the high-souled 
Vasu by means of his huge shafts. Having taken up that
car in the warfare with hundreds of arrows Vasu took up 
mace in his hands for his destruction. Having taken up that 
mace having a burning head and resembling the rod of Death 
Sāvitra struck Sumālin on his head therewith. Having failed 
on his head that mace shone like a fire-brand as the 
thunderbolt, discharged by Indra, falls roaring on the summit of a 
mountain. By the stroke of that mace his person was 
reduced to ashes and therefore there was not seen in the battle 
field either his bone, head or flesh. Having beheld him slain 
in the warfare the Rākshasas bewailing ran about on all 
sides and being distressed by Vasu they could not stay in the 
battle field." 

SECTION XXXIII. 
```````````````

"Beholding Sumālin slain and reduced to ashes by Vasu 
and being assailed by the deities the Rākshasa host fled into 
diverse directions. And collecting all the Rākshasas stood 
there the highly powerful Meghanāda, enraged, the son of 
Rāvana. Like unto flaming fire approaching towards forest 
that great car-warrior encountered the enemies in a precious 
car coursing at will. And as soon as he, armed with various 
weapons, entered the field the celestials, at his very sight, fled 
away to all directions. None could stand before him, 
well-versed in war-fare. Thereupon beholding the deities terrified 
and pierced with shafts, Indra, the king of gods, said—'Be 
not afraid, O ye celestials; do not fly away; come back to the 
battle; this my son, who has never been vanquished, goes to 
battle.' Thereupon Sakra's son, known as divine Jayanta, 
proceeded towards the field of action in a wondrous car. 
And having encircled Sachi's son and encountered Rāvana's 
son the deities began to assail him. And the encounter 
between Mahendra's son Jayanta and Rāvana's son Meghanāda, 
and that between the deities and Rakshas was like one 
between gods and demons. Thereupon Rāvana's son began to 
assail, with shafts feathered in gold, his (Jayanta's) charioteer 
Gomukha, Mātali's son. Sachis' son too, enraged, assailed 
on all sides, Rāvana's son and his charioteer. And the 
powerful Rāvani, stricken with ire and with eyes expanded, 
covered Sakra's son with arrows. Thereupon Rāvana's son 
struck the celestial host with thousands of huge mountain 
summits, Sataghnis, maces, Prasas, clubs, daggers, Parashus 
and various other sharp pointed weapons, Rāvana's son 
thus striking Indra's army the quarters were enshrouded 
with darkness by his illusory power. Being overpowered 
with arrows on all sides the celestial army, leaving aside
Jayanta, became restless. The deities or the Rākshasa—they 
could not recognize one another—and being distressed they 
ran about on all sides. Being enveloped with darkness and 
having their senses bewildered the celestials killed their own 
kith and the Rākshasas their own men—and others fled away.
In the interim a heroic and powerful Daitya-chief—Pulomā 
by name, taking Sachi's son disappeared. And taking his 
own grand-son he entered into the ocean—Pulomā was his 
grand-father for by him Sachi was begotten. And thinking 
that Jayanta was slain all the deities greatly sorry and 
distressed fled away on all sides. Thereupon Rāvana's son, 
enraged and encircled by his own powerful followers, pursued 
the celestials emitting loud cries. Not beholding his son and 
observing the flight of the deities the king of the celestials 
said to Mātali—'Bring my car.' By Mātali was brought, 
the celestial, highly dreadful, huge and quick-coursing chariot, 
that was ready. (And he having) ascended the car, the huge 
clouds, with lightnings, being driven by winds, began to emit 
forth loud mutterings before the chariot. And the 
Gandharvas began to play on various instruments and the Apsarās
began to dance. And taking up various weapons, Indra, the 
king of divinities, set out for the field of action, in the 
company of Rudras, Vasus, Adityas, the two Aswins and 
Maruts. He, having set out for battle, the wind began to 
blow high, the sun was divested of its brilliance and the huge 
fire-brands began to send out flames. In the interval the 
heroic and the highly powerful Daçagriva ascended the 
celestial car, constructed by the Architect of the deities, 
encircled by the huge-bodied serpents capable of making 
down erect and by whose breath the battle-field was ablaze. 
Surrounded by demons and night-rangers and with the 
celestial car he encountered Mahendra in the battle-field. 
And having desisted his son he himself stood there. And 
having come out from the field of action Rāvana's son too 
stood silent. Thereupon there arose an encounter between 
the Rākshasas and the deities and there began a downpour of 
weapons in the conflict like clouds. And the vicious-souled 
Kumbhakarna armed with various weapons came 
there—but he did not know, [#]_ O king, with whom the conflict was 
going on. And by him enraged, the celestials were assailed 
with his teeth, feet, arms, hands, Saktis, Tomaras and clubs 
or any weapon whatsoever. Thereupon the night-ranger 
engaged with the highly powerful Rudras and was wounded, 
in the conflict, with incessant strokes of weapons. 
Thereupon the Rākshasa army began to fight with Maruts 
and they were overwhelmed in the encounter with 
the stroke of various weapons. Some fell down on earth 
slain and torn and others became insensible on the back 
of their carriers in the battle. And they all stood there in a 
half-sensible mood, some holding the car, some elephants, 
some asses, some camels, some serpents, some horses, some 
porpoises, some boars, some Pisaca-mouthed animals and some 
embracing the Pannagas. And other night-rangers, having 
their bodies sundered by the deities gave up their being. The 
Rākshasas being slain and lying down on earth the action 
appeared wondrous like a painting. And there issued out in the 
battle-field a river from weapons having blood for its silent 
waters and infested with crows and vultures. Having beheld his 
own army slain by the deities the highly powerful Daçānana, 
enraged, entered the ocean of celestial army and slaying the 
deities in the conflict confronted Sakra. Thereupon Sakra 
took up his huge bow by the twang where-of the ten quarters 
Were filled. Having unstrung his huge bow Indra struck 
Rāvana, on his head, with arrows resembling the flame of 
fire and the rays of the sun. And the Rākshasa-chief 
Daçānana, having long arms, also assailed Indra with hundreds 
of shafts discharged off his bow. They having been thus 
engaged with each other with the downpour of dreadful 
shafts, all the quarters were filled with darkness and in 
consequence thereof nothing was visible." 

.. [#] For he was asleep till then so he was not acquainted with the particulars of war-fare. He used to sleep for six months at a time. 

SECTION XXXIV. 
``````````````

"Whereupon darkness having set in all the celestials and 
Rākshasas, maddened with their strength, began to fight 
crushing one another. And in that darkness—Indra, Rāvana 
and Meghanāda—these three were not possessed by the 
influence of illusion. Beholding his whole army slain in a 
moment, Rāvana, worked up with dreadful ire, sent out 
terrible roars. And in anger, that irrepressible one said to 
the charioteer, stationed on the car—'Do thou take me to 
the other end of the enemies' host. I shall soon with the 
stroke of various weapons despatch the deities to the abode 
of Death. I shall slay Indra, Kuvera, Varuna and 
Yama—what to speak of more—I shall soon destroy all the deities 
and place myself above them. Be not sorry; do thou soon 
drive my chariot. To-day I have told you twice to take me 
to the end of the enemy's army. We are now waiting near 
the Nandana grove—do thou take me to the hill whence the 
sun rises.' Hearing his words the charioteer drove the 
steeds, coursing at will through the enemies' host. 
Thereupon being apprised of his intention, Sakra, 
the king of the celestials, stationed on car, said 
to the deities, in the field of battle—'O ye deities—hear 
my words, what appear to me best. This Ten-necked 
demon must be vanquished by us while alive. Ascending his 
car, gifted with the velocity of the wind, the highly powerful 
one is proceeding amongst the army like unto the deep with 
waves rising during Parva. It is not possible to slay him 
now—for he shall not meet with death in consequence of 
the boon. So let us make him captive—and we should all 
exert to that end. Bali being held captive I am enjoying 
the three worlds—and I think proper to obstruct the course 
of this vicious-souled one.' Having said this and left aside 
Rāvana, Sakra went to another side, O King, and fought 
terrifying the Rākshasas in the conflict. Dacagriva, 
incapable of being thwarted, entered by the northern route 
and the performer of hundred sacrifices by the southern. 
Thereupon having entered into the army up to a hundred 
leagues—the lord of Rākshasas overpowered the celestial 
host with a downpour of shafts. Thereupon beholding his 
own army slain, Sakra returned fearlessly and obstructed 
the Ten-necked demon. In the interim beholding Rāvana 
brought under his grasp by Sakra the demons and Rākshasas 
cried aloud. 'Alas we are slain.' Thereupon ascending 
his car Rāvana's son, beside himself with rage, entered the 
dreadful flank. And having resorted to the illusory powers, 
conferred upon him in yore by Paçupati he entered into the 
enemies' camp and belaboured them. Having left behind all 
other deities he pursued Indra and the highly effulgent 
Mahendra too espied his enemy's son. And albeit assailed 
by the highly powerful deities, Rāvana's son, divested of 
mail, entertained no fear. Having overpowered the 
approaching charioteer with many excellent arrows he covered 
Mahendra with a downpour of shafts. Thereat having left 
his car and charioteer Indra mounted his elephant Airavat 
and ran about in search of Rāvana's son. Being invisible 
in the welkin by virtue of his illusory powers and having 
brought Indra under the influence thereof he struck him 
with hundreds of arrows. When Rāvana's son came to 
know that Indra was exhausted he, having bound him up 
by virtue of illusion, proceeded towards his army. And 
having seen Mahendra carried away by force from the 
battle field the deities thought 'What is this?' That 
conqueror of Sakra and subduer of enemies, conversant 
with illusory powers, was not visible, by whom, Indra, 
although master of many illusions, was carried away by 
force. In the meantime, the celestials, all enraged, covered 
Rāvana with a downpour of shafts and belaboured him. 
And being worn out in the encounter with the Adityas 
and Vasus he was not capable of fighting any more. 
Beholding his father thus distressed and assailed in 
warfare with strokes, Rāvana's son, although invisible, said—'Do 
thou come O father, our work in the battle field is finished; 
know, we have achieved victory; be thou consoled and 
divested of agonies. By virtue of my illusory powers I have 
made Mahendra captive—the lord of the three worlds
and of the celestial host and have crushed down the pride
of the deities. Having subdued thy enemy by virtue of thy 
prowess do thou enjoy the three worlds at thy pleasure.
What is the use of labouring again? And useless it is to 
fight again.' Hearing the words of Rāvana's son the
deities retired from the battle field, and went away without 
Sakra. And hearing the sweet words of his son, the lord
of the night-rangers, the enemy of the celestials, having great
prowess and wide spread fame, desisted from fighting and 
affectionately said to his son—'Thou hast enhanced the glory of 
our race displaying thy prowess like a highly powerful 
man. Thou hast vanquished the celestials and their king 
of unequalled might. Do thou set out hence for the city, 
taking Indra on thy chariot and surrounded by soldiers. I 
shall, soon, delighted, follow thee with my councillors.' 
Thereupon having returned home with his army and 
chariots and taking the king of the celestials, the powerful 
son of Rāvana dismissed the victorious warriors." 

SECTION XXXV.
`````````````

"The highly powerful Mahendra being thus defeated by 
Rāvana's son, all the celestials, taking the patriarch Brahmā 
before them, went to Lankā. Having obtained Rāvana 
encircled by his sons and brothers the Patriarch, stationed in 
the welkin, calmly said—'My son, Rāvana, I have 
been pleased with thy son in the conflict. Oh! what 
wonderful prowess, what strength—equal or greater than 
thine. Thou hast, by thy own prowess, conquered the three 
worlds—thy promise hath borne fruits—I have been pleased 
with you—both the father and son. O Rāvana, this thy son 
is highly powerful and gifted with great strength and he shall 
be celebrated in the world under the appellation of 'Indrajit' 
or the conqueror of Indra. And that Rākshasa shall be 
powerful and irrepressible, by whose help, O king, the 
celestials have been brought under thy subjection. Do thou 
therefore, O thou having long arms, release Mahendra, the 
chastiser of Paka and for setting him free what do thou want 
from the celestials?' Thereupon the highly powerful 
Indrajit—the subduer of enemies, said:—'If dost thou say so, O god, 
I pray for immortality.' Thereat the highly powerful 
patriarch said to Meghanada—'There is none perfectly 
immortal on earth amongst created beings—birds, quadrupeds 
and other highly powerful beings.' Hearing the words 
uttered by the grand-father—the highly powerful Meghanāda 
said to the eternal lord—'Hear, then, what I want in exchange 
for releasing Sakra. May a chariot with horses rise up from 
fire when I shall offer sacrifices unto it, being desirous of 
vanquishing my enemies in the conflict. And may I be 
immortal as long as I shall remain on that car. This is the 
boon I have resolved upon praying for. May I meet with
destruction, O deity, whenever I shall engage in fight without 
finishing my offerings unto fire. All others, O god, attain 
to immortality by virtue of devout penances but I shall acquire 
that by dint of my own prowess.' Whereto the grand-father 
replied saying 'So be it.' Thereupon Meghanāda released 
Indra and the celestials returned to their own abode. In the 
interval, O Rāma, Indra became poorly, divested of his
immortal brilliance, stricken with anxiety and pensive. 
Beholding him in that plight the grand-father of the deities 
said:—'O performer of hundred sacrifices, why didst thou 
formerly perpetrate that mighty iniquity? O Chief of the 
immortals! O lord! Some creatures were created by me 
by dint of my understanding—they were all of the same 
colour, same speech, and same appearance. There was no 
difference visible in their appearance or marks. Thereupon, 
with whole-minded-ness, I began to think of these created 
beings. And I created a female distinct from them. 
Collecting all those limbs that were most excellent amongst the 
created, I made a female under the name of Ahalyā. *Hal* 
means ugliness—one born from *Hal* is called *Halya*. That 
female was known as *Ahalyā* because she had nothing 
blameable in her. I gave her that name. Having created that 
female I was thinking, O king of the celestials! O foremost 
of the deities! On whom I should confer her. Being proud of 
dignity, O Sakra, O lord, O Purandara thou didst regard her 
in thy mind as thy spouse. I placed her under the care of 
the high-souled Gautama and he rendered her back after 
many long years. Thereupon considering the patience and 
accomplished asceticism of Gautama I married her with him. 
And that virtuous-souled, great ascetic enjoyed her company; 
and for my thus conferring her upon Gautama all the 
celestials were disappointed. But being enraged and 
possessed by lust thou didst repair to the hermitage of the ascetic 
and see her resplendant like the flaming fire. Maddened 
with lust and ire thou didst ravish her and thou wast seen in 
that hermitage by the great ascetic. Thou wast then 
imprecated by him, enraged and gifted with great effulgence saying, 
"O lord of the celestials, thou hast attained to a change of 
circumstances—for which, O Vasava, thou hast fearlessly 
ravished my spouse. Thou shalt, therefore, O Sakra, go 
under the arms of the enemies, in conflict. And this vile 
desire, O thou having a vicious intellect, which thou hast first 
created, shall undoubtedly spread in the world of mortals. 
Whoever shall commit this crime, shall be half responsible 
for it and the other half shall descend upon thee; and 
forsooth thy position shall not be permanent. And whoever 
shall be the lord of the celestials, shall not have his position 
secure. This is the curse I give, which I have communicated to 
thee." And having remonstrated with his wife that one of 
devout penances said to her—"O vicious one, let thy beauty 
be spoiled in the vicinity of the hermitage. Thou art gifted 
with beauty and youth but thy mind is fickle; so thou shalt not 
continue as the single beautiful damsel in the world. All 
created beings shall participate thy beauty; thy matchless beauty has 
brought about this mischief." Thenceforward all created beings 
were gifted with beauty. Thereupon she propitiated the 
ascetic Gautama saying, "O twice-born one, I was unwittingly 
ravished by Indra, assuming thy form. I have not committed 
this willingly, O ascetic—so do thou be propitiated with me." 
Ahalyā having said this, Gautama replied:—"In the race of 
Ikshwākus, there shall be born a highly effulgent and mighty 
car-warrior, known in the world as Rāma; for performing 
the rites of a Brahman, the mighty-armed Vishnu, assuming a 
human form, shall repair to the forest. Thou shalt be purified 
when thou shalt behold him, O fair damsel. He shall be able to 
purify thee from the iniquity perpetrated. Having treated him 
as a guest when thou shalt come to me again, thou shalt 
live with me, O thou having a fair countenance." Having 
said this that ascetic returned to his hermitage. And 
thenceforward the wife, of that ascetic chanting the 
themes of Brahman, engaged in austere penances. Thou 
hast met with all this in consequence of the imprecation 
of that ascetic. Therefore, O thou having long arms, do 
thou think of thy past iniquity. For that curse and 
nothing else, O Vasava, thou hast been brought under the 
grasp of enemies. Having controlled thy senses, do thou 
soon undertake a sacrifice in honor of Vishnu. Thou shalt 
be purified by that sacrifice and go to heaven; and thy 
son, O lord of celestials, hath not been destroyed in the 
conflict. He hath been taken into the ocean by his grand 
father.' Hearing this and having celebrated the sacrifice 
in honor of Vishnu he again went to the region of celestials 
and reigned there as their king. I have thus described 
to thee the strength of Indrajit—what to speak of others 
he vanquished even Indra—the king of the celestials." 
Hearing the words of Agastya, Rāma, Lakshmana, Vānaras 
and Rākshasas all said "Wonderful it is," and 
Bibhishana, who was by the side of Rāma, said:—"After a 
long time, the old recollections have come to my mind." 
Thereupon Rāma said to Agastya—"All, thou hast said, is 
true." And Agastya said "Rāma, Rāvana, the thorn of 
people, then grew in power, by whom, in the company 
of his son, Indra, the lord of the celestials, was defeated." 

SECTION XXXVI.
``````````````

Thereupon having bowed unto Agastya the foremost of 
ascetics, the highly effulgent Rāma again surprisingly 
said:—"O Brahman, O foremost of twice-born ones, when that 
cruel Rāvana journeyed over the earth, was it void of people? 
Was there no king, or prince on earth to administer 
punishment unto him? Were all the kings then shorn of 
their strength and prowess? And many kings I (hear) were 
vanquished and driven out by him with various excellent 
weapons." Hearing the words of Rāghava, the ascetic 
Agastya, having six sorts of wealth, laughing said, like unto 
Brahmā, speaking to Rudra—"O Rāma, O lord of earth, 
traversing the earth, Rāvana arrived at the city of Mahismati, 
resembling the city of the celestials, where lived perpetually 
the deity of fire. There reigned a king named Arjuna, 
effulgent like fire which was kept perpetually in a well covered 
with *Sara*. One day the highly powerful Arjuna, the king 
of *Haihayas*, repaired to the river Nerbuda, with his wives to 
sport. At the very same day, Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, 
arrived there and asked his councillors saying. 'Where is 
the king Arjuna? Do ye speedily tell me; I am Rāvana, 
I have come to fight with your king. Do ye, at first, 
communicate unto him the news of my arrival.' Being thus 
addressed by Rāvana, the learned ministers informed the 
lord of Rākshasas, of the absence of the king. Hearing of 
the absence of the king from the citizens Visrasraba's son 
came out of the city and reached the Vindhya mountain 
resembling the Himalayas. He espied the mountain 
extending over the welkin like unto clouds and rising up as if 
riving the earth and obstructing the sky. The mountain had 
a thousand summits and the lions were residing in the caves 
and hundreds of fountains were falling from it; the mountain 
was as if laughing aloud and the celestials, Gandharvas, 
Apsarās and Kinsaras were sporting there with their females; 
and it appeared (in consequence thereof) like the region of 
celestials; and rivers, with waters transparent like crystal, 
were flowing. And it therefore appeared like a thousand 
serpents having trembling tongues. And casting his 
looks upon Vindhya mountain, resembling the Himalayas 
and having huge caves, Rāvana, the king of Rākshasas, 
reached the river Nerbuda, of holy waters and going 
rapidly to the western ocean. Her waters were being 
agitated by buffaloes, deer, tigers, lions, bears and elephants 
distressed by heat. Having covered her, Chakrabakas, 
Kārandavas, swans, water-cocks and Sārasas, maddened, were 
emitting notes. The charming Nerbuda appeared like a 
beautiful damsel—having blossoming trees for her ornaments, 
Chakrabakas for her breast, wide spread forest for her waist, 
the row of swans for Mekhala, filaments of flowers for paste, 
watery foams for white silken cloth, the pleasure of descending 
into water for the pleasure of touch and full-blown lotuses 
for white eyes. Having descended from his car and bathed 
in the waters of Nerbuda, the foremost of streams, 
resembling a fair one, Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, with this 
councilors, sat on her coast resided by many an ascetic.
Delighted at her beauty and having spoken highly of Nerbuda 
like unto Ganges he addressed his ministers Suka and Sārana 
with gestures, saying:—'Behold, having rendered the earth 
pale, with his many rays, the sun, emitting parching 
heat, is in the sky. But seeing me here seated, 
his rays have become cool like those of the moon. 
At my fear, even the wind is blowing carefully, being 
cold and fragrant by the touch of the waters of the Nerbuda 
and removing our toil. This charming Nerbuda, abounding 
in crocodiles, fishes and birds, though a natural stream, is 
standing still like a terrified damsel. Being wounded in 
conflicts with many a king your persons have been pasted 
with blood. Therefore like unto Sarvabhauma and other 
infuriated elephants going down into the water of the 
Ganges, do ye descend into the water of Nerbuda conferring 
auspiciousness and health. Bathing in this stream you shall 
be cleansed from sins. I shall, also on the coast of this river, 
like the rays of the autumnal moon, reverentially worship with 
flowers Mahādeva, holding Pināka in his hands.' Hearing the 
words of Rāvana, Prahasta, Suka, Sārana, Mahodara, 
Dhrumākshya and other councillors descended into the waters 
of Nerbuda. And she was agitated by those 
elephant-like leading Rākshasas like unto the Ganges by Vamana, 
Anjana, Padma and other elephants, Thereupon having 
got up from the waters the highly powerful Rākshasas 
culled flowers for Rāvana's offerings. And in a moment 
the Rākshasas collected heaps of flowers on the 
picturesque banks of Nerbuda, resembling the white clouds. 
Flowers being thus collected, Rāvana, the king of Rākshasas 
descended, into the Nerbuda for bathing like a 
huge elephant into the Ganges. And having bathed he got 
up, reciting excellent incantations. Thereupon having left 
off his wet cloth he put on a white one. And to find out 
place for worshipping, he, with folded hands, proceeded 
towards the banks. And the Rākshasas too, like unto so 
many moving mountains, followed him. And wherever 
Rāvana went the golden *Siva Linga* was brought. 
Thereupon Rāvana placed that upon a heap of sands 
and began to worship it with various nectar-smelling 
flowers and sandal. And having finished the worship of 
Siva, the foremost of deities, having the moon on his 
crown, the conferrer of boons and the remover of miseries, 
the night-ranger danced with uplifted hands and sang 
before it." 

SECTION XXXVII. 
```````````````

"At no distance from where on the banks of the 
river Nerbuda, that dreadful lord of Rākshasas collected the 
flowers, Arjuna, the King of Mahismati, and the foremost 
of the victorous, was sporting with his wives in the water. 
And being encircled by them the king Arjuna appeared 
like a leading elephant surrounded by a thousands of she 
elephants. In order to measure the strength of his thousand 
arms the King of *Haihayas* obstructed the course of 
Nerbuda. Being obstructed by the arms of 
Kārtavirjarjuna and having flooded the banks with her pure 
waters, Nerbuda flowed in an opposite direction. And 
the currents, rising high as during the rainy season 
flowed with fishes, and crocodiles. And that stream, as if
driven against Rāvana by Kārtavirjarjuna, carried away his 
collection of flowers. And having given up his worship which 
was half-finished Rāvana looked towards Nerbuda looking 
like an unwilling damsel and saw that she, with rising currents, 
was flowing towards the east from the west and the waters 
beyond that were in a natural state like a quiet lady and the 
birds were seated there without any anxiety. Thereupon being 
anxious to learn the cause of the rise of the river, the 
Ten-necked demon, with his right finger, hinted Suka and Sārana. 
Being commanded by Rāvana, the two brothers, the heroic 
Suka and Sārana proceeded towards the west by the aerial 
way. And going half a league, the two night-rangers espied 
a man sporting in the waters with some females. He was huge 
as a Sāla tree, his hairs were floating on the water, he was 
inebriete and his eyes were reddened in consequence thereof. 
Like unto Sumeru holding the earth with his thousand feet 
he obstructed the current of the river with his thousand arms. 
And he was surrounded by a thousands of beautiful damsels like 
an elephant by a thousands of she-elephants. Beholding that 
dreadful spectacle, the Rākshasas Suka and Sārana came 
back and approaching Rāvana communicated (all) unto him. 
'O lord of Rākshasas, an unknown person, huge as a Sāla 
tree, is sporting with females obstructing the course of 
Nerbuda like unto a dam. And being withheld by the 
thousand arms of that man the waters of Nerbuda were 
continually throwing up high waves.' Hearing the words of 
Suka and Sārana, Rāvana exclaimed 'This is Arjuna' and 
proceeded to fight with him. Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, 
having set out with a hostile intention against Kārtavirjarjuna, 
the wind mixed with dust began to blow high with tumultuous 
sound. And the clouds began to mutter with a downpour of 
rain. And the lord of Rākshasas proceeded against Arjuna 
with Mahodara, Mahaparswa, Dhrumākshya, Suka and 
Sairana. Within a short time the dreadful Rākshasa, 
powerful as the elephant Arjuna, reached the banks of Nerbuda 
and espied there Arjuna encircled by females as an elephant 
surrounded by she-elephants. At the very sight the eyes of 
the lord of Rākshasas, proud of his prowess, grew red and 
addressing the councillors of the king Arjuna he said 'Do 
ye communicate unto the king of *Haihayas* that Rāvana, the 
lord of Rākshasas, hath come to fight with him.' Hearing 
the words of Rāvana, the ministers of Arjuna stood up with 
arms and said 'O good Rāvana, thou art well cognizant 
of the proper time for fighting. Now our king is drunk and is 
sporting with the females in the waters. And now dost thou 
wish to fight with him. Therefore, O Ten-necked one, do 
thou spend the night here, if thou art bent upon fighting. Or 
even if thou art anxious to enter speedily into conflict with 
Arjuna do thou slay us all at first, and then fight with the 
king.' Thereupon the hungry councillors of Rāvana slew 
some of the ministers of the king and devoured some. There 
arose a dreadful uproar on the banks of Nerbuda, of the 
councillors of Rāvana and Arjuna. The warriors of Arjuna 
assailed Rāvana and his ministers with hundreds of arrows, 
Praças, darts, Tomaras, thunder-bolts and Karpanas. The 
warriors of Arjijna became dreadfully furious and emitted cries 
like the roaring of the deep infested with crocodiles, fishes 
and other marine monsters. Thereupon being enraged and 
displaying their own prowess Suka, Sārana and other 
ministers of Rāvana began to destroy Arjuna's soldiers. 
Thereupon the emissaries, stricken with fear, went to the
sporting king and communicated unto him the proceedings of 
Rāvana and his ministers. Hearing those words and saying 
unto the females 'Do not fear' he rose up from the waters like 
an elephant. The eyes of that fire-like Arjuna were reddened 
with ire and he shone dreadfully like the fire of dissolution. 
And taking up speedily his club, that one, always using 
golden clubs, pursued the Rākshasas like unto darkness 
following the sun. Holding up the huge club and hurling 
it with his arms, Arjuna, resorting to the velocity of Garuda,
went on. Thereupon stood there obstructing his course the
Rākshasa, worked up with anger and with a mace in his 
hand, like unto the Vindhya range standing in the way of 
the sun. And throwing down off his hand the iron mace, 
he, in anger, began to roar, like Yama. And the top of the 
mace was ablaze like the tips of Asoka flowers. Not the 
least agitated on beholding that mace, the king Arjuna, by 
his club, baffled its action. Thereupon uplifting the huge 
club, five hundred hands long, the king of *Haihayas* pursued 
Prahasta. And within a short time being struck down by 
that club gifted with great velocity Prahasta fell down on 
earth like unto the summit of a mountain clapped down by 
the thunder-bolt of Indra. Beholding Prahasta fallen, 
Māricha, Suka, Sārana, Mahodara and Dhrumākshya fled 
away from the battle-field. All the councillors having thus 
fled away and Prahasta being slain Rāvana speedily 
proceeded towards Arjuna, the foremost of kings. Thereupon 
there ensued a terrible encounter capable of making down
erect between the thousand-armed Arjuna, the king of men, 
and the twenty-armed Rāvana, the king of Rākshasas.
And taking up their clubs Arjuna and Rāvana began to 
fight with one another emitting cries like the mutterings 
of clouds, like unto two huge bulls fighting for a cow, two 
agitated oceans, two moving mountains, two effulgent 
Adityas, two burning flames, two proud elephants, two 
proud lions and like the very Rudra and Kāla. As the 
mountains suffer many clappings of thunder-bolts so did 
they bear many strokes. And all the quarters were 
resounded with the sound proceeding from the stroke of 
their clubs like unto the sound of thunder-bolts. Being 
placed against the breast of Rāvana Arjuna's club rendered, 
for a moment, the welkin look like the burning gold as does the 
lightning. And striking again and again against Arjuna's breast 
Rāvana's club looked like a huge fire-brand. Arjuna was 
not worn out nor was Rāvana. And the conflict went on 
between them like the encounter between Bala and 
Vasava in the days of yore. The King of men and the 
King of Rakshasas assailed and wounded one another 
with their clubs like unto two bulls striking one 
another with their horns and two elephants with their 
tusks. Thereupon worked up with rage, Arjuna, with 
his full might, smote Rāvana on his breast, with his club. 
But Rāvana was well protected by the boon of the 
celestial, so the club fell on earth sundered into two 
pieces like one hurled by a weak wight. Still wounded by 
the mace of Arjuna, Rāvana, shedding tears, ran away at a 
distance of four feet and sat there. Beholding Rāvana 
thus over-whelmed Arjuna sprang up and caught him 
like Garuda holding a serpent and Vishnu binding Bali. 
Daçagriva being thus bound, the Siddhas, Charanas and 
the celestials exclaiming 'Well done! Well done!!' 
showered flowers upon Arjuna. And the king emitted leonine 
roars again and again as a tiger joyous roars like a 
cloud, holding a deer under his grasp. Regaining his sense 
and beholding Rāvana bound, Prahasta, in great anger, 
pursued the King of *Haihayas*. And the Rakshasa force 
grew tempestuous like unto the rising of the ocean during 
rains. Thereupon exclaiming repeatedly 'Leave him off! 
Leave him off!! Wait! Wait!!' The Rākshasa host hurled 
hundreds of Musalas and darts in the battle-field. Not the 
least moved thereby the king Arjuna, the slayer of enemies, 
bore those weapons of the enemies of the celestials. 
Thereupon baffling the weapons of the Rākshasas by means of 
many a dreadful and excellent one, Arjuna, the king of 
*Haihayas*, drove them away like winds scattering the clouds. 
Having thus struck terror unto the night-rangers, he, encircled 
by his own kinsmen, repaired to his own city with Rāvana, 
carrying him bound like unto Indra carrying Bali bound. 
Thereupon flowers and fried paddy were showered upon him 
by the Brāhmanas and citizens." 

SECTION XXXVIII.
```````````````` 

"Thereupon Pulastya heard from the celestials of the 
capture of Rāvana like unto the holding of the wind. [#]_ And 
having been moved by the love for his son, the highly 
effulgent, great ascetic, proceeded to see the king of Mahishmati.
Proceeding by the aerial way, that twice-born one, gifted 
with the velocity of wind and the flight of mind, reached the 
city of Mahishmati. Like unto Brahmā entering Indra's 
Amaravati, he entered the city resembling the capital of 
Indra and filled with delighted and plump citizens. And 
beholding that dreadful Rishi approach like unto Adityā 
walking on foot, the warders communicated the intelligence 
unto the king Arjuna. Understanding from their words that 
Pulastya was coming, the king of *Haihayas*, placing his 
folded palms on his crown, proceeded to welcome him. Like, 
unto Vrihaspati preceeding Purandara, the royal priests went 
before him carrying *Maduparka* and water to wash feet. And 
beholding the ascetic resembling the rising sun arrived, the 
king Arjuna bowed unto him reverentially like Indra saluting 
Mahideva. Thereupon offering him Maduparka, cow and 
water to wash feet, the king of *Haihayas* in accents 
obstructed with delight, addressed the ascetic 
saying:—'Reverend Sir, thine visit, it is hard to obtain. On 
beholding thee my city Mahishmati hath been turned into Amaravati. 
To-day have I obtained all auspiciousness, O lord; to-day hath 
my religious observance been fruitful; to-day hath my birth 
proved blessed and to-day hath my devout penance been 
crowned with success, for I bow unto thy feet, which have 
been worshipped by the celestials. This my kingdom, these 
my sons, this my wife and myself are all at thy 
disposal—do thou order me, O Brahman, what I may do for thee.' 
Thereupon having enquired of the king about his piety, 
offerings and the well-being of his sons, Pulastya said to 
Arjuna, the king of Haihayas:—'O foremost of kings, O 
thou having eyes like lotus-petals! O thou having a 
countenance like the full moon! When thou hast vanquished 
Rāvana, thy prowess is matchless in the triple world. Thou 
hast bound up my invincible son in the conflict at whose fear 
the wind and the ocean stand still. Having drunk up the 
glories of my son thou hast announced thine own; so I do 
say, O my son, do thou release Daçānana.' Hearing this 
command of Pulastya, the king Arjuna did not utter a single 
word and set, most delightedly the king of Rākshasas, free. 
Having released that foe of the celestials, worshipped him with 
celestial ornaments and garlands and established friendship 
removing all enmities with Rāvana before fire, and 
bowed unto Pulastya, the son of Brahmā, he repaired to his
own house. And being released by the influence of Pulastya, 
the highly powerful Daçānana, the king of Rākshasas, 
accepted his hospitality and being embraced by him, 
returned home ashamed. And having set Daçagriva at liberty 
Pulastya, the son of Brahmā and the foremost of Munis 
repaired to the celestial region. O Rāma, in this wise, the 
highly powerful Rāvana was defeated by Arjuna and 
released by Pulastya. Observe therefore, O descendant of Raghu, 
there is a mightier man than the mighty; therefore, one, 
desirous of his own well-being, should not disregard another. 
Having acquired friendship with the thousand-armed Arjuna, 
Dacānana, the king of Rākshasas, began again to journey over 
the world distressing the kings." 

.. [#] As it is impossible to hold the wind in a short compass so it was impossible to bind Rāvana and lead him captive. 

SECTION XXXIX. 
``````````````

"Released by Arjuna, and yet not conceiving any shame, 
Rāvana, the king of Rākshasas again began to traverse the 
earth. Rākshasas or men, of whom the proud Rāvana heard 
to be powerful he used to approach and summon them 
for fight. After some time he arrived at the city of 
Kishkindhā reared by Vāli and invited him, wearing golden 
garland, to fight. Thereat, Tāra, her father Sushena 
and the Prince Sugriva said to the king of 
Rākshasas—'O lord of Rākshasas, he is not present here, 
who shall be able to withstand thee. What monkey else 
is capable of standing before thee? However, O Rāvana, Vāli 
shall soon return after performing the Sandhyā rites at the 
confluence of the four oceans; therefore wait here for a 
moment. Behold, O Daçānana, there lie the bones of all 
those, like conch, who came ere this to fight with the 
powerful king of monkeys. O Rāvana, O Rākshasa, even if thou 
hast drunk nectar, thou shalt at this very moment loose thy 
life, when the encounter with Vāli shall take place. O 
Vaisravana, do thou observe the variegated universe 
now—wait for a moment after which it will be hard for thee to 
keep thy life. Or if thou dost wish to meet with death do 
thou speedily repair to the southern ocean and thou shalt 
behold there Vāli like unto fire placed on earth.' Hearing 
those words, Rāvana, the aggrandiser of the triple world, 
remonstrated with Tārā and ascending his flowery car went 
to the southern ocean and espied Vāli, having red 
countenance like the rising sun, engaged in Sandhyā rites with 
whole-mindedness. Thereupon having descended from his 
Pushpaka car he with silent steps approached Vāli to bring 
him under his grasp. Casting his looks at pleasure, Vāli saw 
him. Albeit apprised of his evil intention, he was not the 
least moved. And he did not care for him as a lion is not 
moved on beholding a hare and Garuda on beholding 
a serpent. He then thought within himself—'This 
vicious-souled Rāvana is approaching to catch me; holding him 
under my arm pit I shall journey over the three great oceans. 
Everyone will behold the enemy Rāvana, under my arm pit 
as a serpent possessed by Garuda, with his thighs, arms and 
clothes loosened.' Having thought thus Vāli remained silent 
for sometime and reciting incantations he waited there like 
a mountain. Thereupon the king of monkeys and the 
lord of Rakshasas, proud of strength, essayed to catch one 
another. Vāli was seated with his back (towards Rāvana); 
still from his footsteps he perceived that he had come within 
the grasp of Rāvana’s army and he at once caught hold of 
him like unto Garuda holding a serpent. Getting hold of 
Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, desirous of catching him, 
(Vāli) and placing him under his arm-pit Vāli vehemently 
rose high up in the welkin. And he went away carrying 
him, scratching him again and again with his nails like 
unto winds scattering clouds. The Ten-necked demon being 
thus carried away, his councillors, to release him, pursued, 
exclaiming, Vāli, in the welkin. They thus following him, Vāli, 
appeared in the sky like the sun in the midst of clouds. The 
Rākshasas could not catch Vāli but were rather exhausted 
by the stroke of his arms and thighs. What to speak of 
animals made of flesh and blood anxious for their lives even 
the mountains make way when Vāli goes. Rising high up 
into the sky where even the birds cannot reach, Vāli, the 
lord of monkeys and gifted with great velocity, by and by 
finished his Sandhyā rites above the oceans. Being 
worshipped by the aerials their lord, with Rāvana, first 
proceeded to the western ocean. And having finished 
there Sandhyā prayers and recited incantations he, with 
Daçānana, went to the northern ocean. And having 
journeyed over many thousand leagues that huge monkey, 
with his enemy, finished his prayers there and then proceeded 
to the eastern ocean. And having recited his prayers there 
also, Vāli, the son of Indra, and the king of monkeys, 
carrying Rāvana, returned to the city of Kishkindhā. Having 
gone through his Sandhyā rites at the four oceans and 
carrying Rāvana, that monkey-chief was greatly exhausted 
and (therefore) descended into the gardens of Kishkindhā. 
Having got out Rāvana from his arm-pit, the foremost of 
monkeys, laughing again and again said:—'Whence art 
thou coming?' Thereupon being surprised greatly, 
Daçānana, the king of Rākshasas, with eyes shaking with 
exhaustion, said to the king of monkeys:—'O king of 
monkeys, resembling Mahendra, I am Rāvana, the king of 
Rākshasas; I came here to fight: but I have been defeated 
by thee. Alas! What strength is thine! what prowess!! What 
gravity!!! Holding me like a beast thou hast journeyed over 
the four oceans. O hero! What heroic wight is there who 
is not exhausted by carrying me so vehemently? O monkey, 
mind, wind and Garuda—these three are gifted with the 
velocity. Undoubtedly thou hast got the same velocity. 
Thy prowess hath been sufficiently displayed. But now 
I wish, O king of monkeys, to make friends with thee for ever 
before fire. O king of monkeys, from to-day, wife, sons, 
city, kingdom, enjoyment, cloth and food shall be our 
common.' Thereupon having lighted up fire the king of 
monkeys and the king of Rakshasas, embracing each other, 
became friends. Thereupon holding each other by the 
arms they entered the city of Kishkindhā like unto two lions, 
entering delightedly a cave. There like Sugriva Rāvana 
spent a month. Afterwards his councillors, desirous of 
destroying the triple world, took him away. O lord Rāma, I 
have thus related to thee the previous history. Having 
thus belaboured Rāvana Vāli at last made friends with 
before fire. O Rāma, Vāli had unequalled and great strength, 
Like unto fire burning down locusts thou didst burn down 
Vāli." 

SECTION XL. 
```````````

Thereupon Rāma, being stricken with curiosity, with 
folded palms and humbly accosted Agastya, residing in the 
southern quarter, with pregnant accents, saying;—"Thou 
sayest that Rāvana and Vāli had unequalled strength but 
methinks theirs can not equal that of Hanumān. Heroism, 
liberality, strength, patience, intellect, knowledge of laws 
and means, prowess and energy all exist together in 
Hanumān. When the monkey host lost heart on beholding the 
ocean, Hanumān, consoling crossed over the deep extending 
over a hundred leagues. Having desecrated the presiding 
goddess of Lankā and on beholding Sitā there, he consoled 
her. What to speak of more, Hanumān, single-handed, 
slew Rāvana’s commander-in-chief, the minister's son, his 
servants and his one son. Being released from the Brahma 
weapon Hanumān remonstrated with Rāvana, and reduced 
Lankā into ashes like unto fire burning down earth. What I 
have seen myself performed by Hanumān in the conflict is 
above the power of Kāla, Vāsava and even the lord of riches. 
It is by the strength of the arms of that Wind-god's son I have 
obtained Lankā, Sitā, Lakshrnana, Victory, kingdom and 
my friends. What more, had not Hanumān, the friend of 
the king of monkeys—Sugriva, been in my company who 
could have brought Sitā's intelligence? Why did not Hanumān, 
although wishing welfare unto Sugriva, reduce Vāli to ashes like 
so many creepers on the occasion of his quarrel with Sugriva? 
Methinks, Hanumān was not cognisant of his own prowess 
then? And therefore he did stoop to witness the miseries 
of Sugriva—the king of monkeys who was dearer than his 
life. O thou worshipped of the immortals, do thou truly 
describe unto me this action of Hanumān." Hearing those 
well-meaning words of Rāghava, the ascetic Agastya said to 
him in the presence of Hanumān. "O foremost of Raghus, 
what thou hast said regarding Hanumān is all true. As 
regards, strength, velocity and intellect there is none who 
can equal Hanumān. O represser of enemies, in the days of 
yore Hanumān was imprecated by the ascetics, whose curses 
never become fruitless, to the effect that he would never be 
conscious of his whole strength. I am not capable of describing 
to thee the wondrous childish feat which Hanumān did 
perform in his boyhood. But if thou art, O Rāghava, greatly 
anxious to hear it, I shall relate—do thou hear with a quiescent 
mind. Hanumān's father Keshari reigned in the mountain 
Sumeru which resembles gold by the influence of the sun. 
Keshari had a well-known wife by the name of Anjanā to whom 
he was greatly attached. The deity Wind begot on Anjanā an 
excellent son. Repairing to a dense forest for collecting 
fruits, the excellent damsel gave birth to Hanumān 
resembling the tip of a Sāla tree and went away. Being distressed 
with hunger on account of the absence of the mother, 
Hanumān, just born, cried like Kartikeya, the 
commander-in-chief of the celestials, in the forest of *Saras*. At this time 
the sun resembling *Yavā* flowers, having risen, Hanumān, 
to get a fruit, sprang up. Being desirous of holding the 
newly risen sun, Hanumān, resembling it, began to leap in 
the middle of the welkin. The child Hanumān having thus 
ascended the sky, celestials, Dānavas and Yakshas 
surprisingly exclaimed 'The velocity, with which Marut's son is going, 
is not possessed even by the Wind, Garuda and mind. If he 
has got such vehemence in his boyhood what great strength 
he shall have in his youth.' His own son thus leaping, the 
wind, becoming cool by the touch of snow, began to follow 
him proceeding in the sky lest the rays of the sun might 
scorch him. Rising high up in the sky on account of childish 
freaks and traversed many thousand leagues by the help of 
his father Hanumān neared the sun. Considering that he 
was a mere child and therefore not tarnished by any sin and 
that a great divine work would be accomplished by him in 
future the sun did not burn Hanumān. At the every day 
when Hanumān sprang up to hold the sun, Rahu too essayed 
to possess him. Having reached the top of the sun's car 
Hanumān touched Rahu; so he, the represser of the moon's 
rays, accordingly went back on beholding the sun thus 
possessed. And repairing to the house of Indra, Sinhika's 
son, in wrath and with frowns, said to him encircled by the 
celestials:—'O Vasava! O slayer of Bala and Vitra—to 
remove my hunger thou didst give me both the sun and moon; 
why thou hast then given them to another? On account 
of the *Parva* I came to devour the sun but another Rahu 
came and possessed him.' Hearing the words of Rahu, 
the King of the deities, wearing a golden garland, having 
his understanding bewildered, proceeded, on the back of 
his elephant-chief Airavat, huge like the summit of the 
Kailasa hill, with temporal juice always trickling, having 
four tusks, roaring, and adorned with golden bells, towards 
Hanumān and the sun with Rahu before him. Having left 
behind Indra, Rahu quickly went there but fled away on 
beholding the huge-bodied Hanumān resembling a mountain 
summit. Thereupon leaving aside the sun and being desirous 
of holding Rāhu, the son of Sinhikā considering him as a 
fruit, Hanumān again sprang up into the sky. Beholding 
Hanumān approach renouncing the sun, Rahu with his 
countenance only visible, desisted and went back. And 
considering Indra as the saviour he again and again cried 
aloud 'Indra! Indra!!' Understanding everything by the 
piteous accents of Rahu Indra said, 'No fear, I shall soon 
slay him.' Thereupon beholding the huge-bodied Airavat and 
considering him as a bigger fruit Māruti ran towards him. 
Proceeding thus tempestuously when he rose above the head 
of Indra, Hanumān, looked in a moment dreadful like the fire 
of dissolution. But not greatly enraged the thousand-eyed 
lord of Sachi, with the thunder-bolt in his hand, struck the 
running Hanumān. Belaboured by the thunder-bolt of Indra 
Hanumān fell down and broke his left jaw. He being thus 
overwhelmed by the stroke of Indra's thunder-bolt, the 
Wind-god became displeased with the king of celestials and 
was determined upon bringing about mischief unto all created 
beings. The all-comprehending wind, not spreading 
himself, entered into a cave with his son. Like unto Vāsava 
distressing all creatures by putting a stop to the showers, 
the wind too put all animals into unbearable suffering by 
obstructing all execrations. On account of the anger of the 
Wind-god their breath was completely obstructed, and the 
joints—as if pierced, became hard as wood. *Sādhya* 
*Vasatkār* and all the religious observances of the triple world 
were put a stop to by the anger of the Wind-god. So the 
three worlds appeared as if stricken with sorrow. Thereupon 
the afflicted celestials, Gandharvas, Asuras and men repaired 
to the Patriarch Brahmā with a view to bring about the 
well-being of created beings. And with their bellies swollen 
for the obstruction of the wind the celestials with folded 
hands said:—'O lord of created beings, thou hast created 
four classes of beings and thou hast given us wind to preserve 
our lives. But we do not know, why the wind, the lord of 
our beings, is distressing us, by obstructing our movements like 
unto females confined in an inner apartment. Being thus 
distressed by the wind we have come to seek thy shelter, 
O thou the remover of miseries—do thou remove our 
afflictions consequent upon the obstruction of the wind.' Hearing 
those words of the created beings, their lord (the Patriarch 
Brahmā) again said 'Hear, why the wind, being enraged, 
has obstructed the course of all beings. Hearing the words 
of Rahu, Indra, the king of the celestials, hath belaboured 
the Wind-god's son. It is for this that he hath been offended. 
Preserving the bodied, the wind, having no person, passes 
through them all. Without wind the body becomes like 
wood. Therefore the wind constitutes the life, the happiness 
and the whole universe. Renouncing the wind the world 
cannot attain to happiness. Being cast off by the wind and 
having their breaths obstructed, behold, the world, to-day 
appeareth like dried wood. Let us therefore go there where 
the wind, the giver of our afflictions, waiteth. If we do not 
please the son of Aditi we shall all meet with destruction.' 
Thereupon the Patriarch Brahmā, the celestials, Gandharvas, 
serpents, Guhyakas and other created beings went where the 
wind was waiting with his own son belaboured by the king of 
the celestials. Thereupon beholding that boy, on the lap of 
the Wind-God, resembling gold and Baisvanar, the four-mouthed 
Brahmā, the celestials, Gandharvas, Rishis, Yakshas and 
Rākshasas were all moved with pity." 

SECTION XLI. 
````````````

Hearing the whole history, Rāma, the descendant of 
Raghu, said to Agastya "O Reverend Sir, Riksharaja is the 
name of the father of Vāli and Sugriva but thou hast not told 
me the name of their mother. However I am curious to 
learn who was their mother, where was their residence, and 
how they had been named so—do thou favour me with 
the account." Rāma having said this Agastya said:—"O 
Rāma, I shall relate to thee everything in short of what 
I had heard from Nārada when he came to my hermitage. 
Once on a time whilst travelling that highly pious ascetic 
arrived at my hermitage; I duly worshipped and welcomed 
him; and when I asked him out of curiosity, he, seated at 
pleasure, said:—'Hear, O great ascetic, the foremost of 
the pious; there is a mountain named Meru, highly 
picturesque, made of gold and greatly charming. The middle 
peak is much liked by the celestials, on which is situate the 
beautiful assemblage hall of Brahmā extending over a hundred 
leagues. The four-mouthed deity, sprung from lotus, always 
resideth there. And from his eyes while going through the 
*Yoga* practices tears trickled down. No sooner the Patriarch 
Brahmā, with his hands, wiped them off into the ground 
than a monkey originated from those tears. O foremost of 
men, as soon as that monkey was produced, the high-souled 
Brahmā consoled him in sweet accents and said—"Do thou 
proceed to that leading mountain where the celestials 
perpetually reside. O foremost of monkeys, living upon 
many a fruit and root in that picturesque mountain thou 
shouldst always live by me. And while thou shall live in 
this wise for some time thou shalt be crowned with 
auspiciousness." Brahmā having said this, O Rāghava, the foremost 
of monkeys saluted that god of gods, placing his head at his 
feet and said to that Primaeval deity, the creator of beings 
and the lord of the universe. "O god, thou art placing me 
under thy behests—verily I shall follow them." Having said 
this to Patriarch that monkey immediately went to a forest 
abounding in fruits and flowers. There living on fruits and 
collecting honey and various flowers, he, every day, used 
to come to Brahmā in the evening. O Rāma, in this 
wise he used to make an offering of excellent fruits and 
flowers at the feet of Brahmā, the god of gods. Journeying 
in this way over the mountain he spent many long years. 
Some time having elapsed in this way, O Rāghava, Riksharaja, 
the foremost of monkeys, being distressed with thirst, repaired 
to the excellent mountain Meru. There is a pond of pure 
water, resonant with the notes of various birds. Having 
shaken his manes with a delighted heart, Riksharaja saw his 
reflection in the waters. Beholding his own image there 
that monkey-chief, stricken with anger and anxiety 
thought—"What arch-enemy of mine is living in the waters? 
I shall destroy the excellent abode of the vicious-souled one." 
Thinking thus within himself, that monkey, out of fickleness, 
jumped down into the lake. And he again sprang up 
therefrom. And at the time of rising, O Rāma, that leading 
monkey found himself metamorphosed into a female form, 
which was highly charming, graceful and beautiful. Her 
waist was spacious, eye-brows beautiful and hairs were black 
and curling; her countenance was beautiful and smiling, 
breast high and beauty matchless. And there appeared 
charming on the banks of the lake, lighting up all quarters that 
female, agitating the mind of all, and beautiful in the triple 
world like unto simple *Sastilatā*, Ramā, without lotus, pure 
rays of the moon, Parvati more beautiful than even Lakshmi. 
At this time was returning by that way, Indra, the leader of 
the celestials after having worshipped the feet of Brahmā. 
And the sun too journeying arrived there. They both 
simultaneously espied that female form and were possessed 
by desire. What more, their whole body, as soon as they 
saw her, was moved and the firmness of the mind shaken. 
Thereupon Indra begot on her a son named Vāli for he 
originated from her hairs and the sun begot on her another 
son, who was named Sugriva for he originated from her neck. 
Thus the two highly powerful monkeys being born, Indra went 
back to his region having conferred upon Vāli an un-ending 
garland of gold. And having engaged Hanumān, the 
Wind-god's son in the service of Sugriva, the sun too went back to 
the sky. O king, the sun having risen after, that night 
Riksharaja again obtained his own real monkey shape. 
Having thus regained his monkey form he made his two 
highly powerful sons,—leading monkeys, assuming shapes at 
will and having tawny eyes, drink honey, like nectar. 
Thereupon taking them, he came to the abode of Brahmā. 
Beholding his son Riksharaja with his sons, Brahmā, the 
grand-father of the celestials, consoled him in diverse ways. 
Then he ordered the celestial messenger saying—"At my 
behest, O emissary, do thou proceed to the highly picturesque 
city of Kishkindhā. That golden, big and charming city is 
worthy of Riksharajā. There live many thousand monkeys 
besides others assuming shapes at will. It abounds in various 
jewels, invincible, is inhabited by four *Varnas*, holy and 
sacred. At my command Visvvakarmā has constructed the 
celestial and picturesque city of Kishkindhā. Do thou place 
there Riksharāja, the foremost of monkeys, with his sons; 
and having invited the leading monkeys and others and 
received them courteously do thou install him on the throne. 
On beholding this monkey-chief, gifted with intelligence they 
shall be all subject to him." Brahmā, having said this, the 
celestial emissary, with Riksharāja before him, proceeded to 
the highly picturesque city of Kishkindhā. And having 
entered there with the velocity of the wind, he, at the 
command of the Patriarch, crowned the leading monkey 
Riksharāja as king. And being sprinkled according to the 
ceremonies of installation, and adorned with a crown and 
various other ornaments he, with a delighted heart, engaged 
in governing the monkeys. All the monkeys, residing on earth 
consisting of seven insular continents and bounded by 
ocean, came under his subjection. Thus Riksharāja was 
both the father and mother of Vāli and Sugriva. May good 
betide thee. The learned who listen to and make others 
hear this story, conducing to the enhancement of their 
delight, get all their desires and objects accomplished. I 
have duty described to thee at length all events and have 
recounted the stories relating to the birth of the Kings of 
monkeys and Rākahsasas.'" 

SECTION XLIII. 
``````````````

Hearing this excellent Paurānic theme in the company 
of his brothers, Rāghava was greatly surprised. Thereupon 
hearing the words of the Rishi he said:—"By thy favour I have 
listened to the highly sacred theme. O foremost of Munis. 
I was greatly worked up with curiosity in this matter. I am 
not the least surprised to learn, O twice-born one, that those 
two sons of the celestials would be two highly powerful leading 
monkeys since their origin is divine." Rāma having said this 
Agastya said:—"O thou having long arms, thus in the days 
of yore the birth of Vāli and Sugriva was brought about. O 
king, I shall now again relate to thee another divine theme. 
O Rāma I shall now describe to thee why did Rāvana steal 
Sitā. Do thou hear it attentively. O Rāma, in the golden 
age, having bowed unto the Patriarch’s son, the truthful Rishi 
Sanatkumar, highly effulgent, resplendent like unto the sun, 
shining in his native brilliance and seated at his own place, 
Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, said:—'Who is now amongst 
the celestials brave and powerful, by whose help the 
celestials can vanquish their enemies and whom the 
twice-born ones daily worship and the devotees meditate upon. 
O thou having piety for wealth, O thou gifted with six sorts 
of wealth, do thou describe this to me kindly.' Being 
apprised of Rāvana's intention, the saint Sanatkumar, who saw 
every thing through his devotion, said to him out of 
love—'Hear my son. The learned duly, in their sacrifices, 
worship that Hari, respected of people and drinking nectar, 
who is the lord of the universe, whoso origin we do not 
know, who is daily worshipped by the celestials and Asuras, 
who is highly powerful Nārāyana from whose navel has sprung 
Brahmā, the creator of the world, and who has created the 
universe consisting of mobile and immobile beings. The 
Yogis meditate upon him and celebrate sacrifices in his 
honor according to the Purānas, Vedas, *Pancharātra* and 
other rituals. He always vanquisheth in encounter Daityas 
Danavas, Rakshasas and all other enemies of the celestials 
and every one of them worships him.' Hearing those 
words of the great ascetic Sanatkumar, Rāvana, the lord of 
Rākshasas, bowing, replied:—'Being slain by Hari to what 
station do the Daityas, Danavas and Rākshasas attain? And 
why doth Hari destroy them?' Whereto Sanatkumar 
replied:—'Whoever are slain by the celestials do eternally 
reside in their region. And being banished therefrom, they 
again take their birth on earth. Thus by the misery and 
happiness acquired in their pristine existence, they go 
through births and deaths. O king, all the monarchs, slain 
by Janarddana, holding discus and the lord of the triple world, 
attained to his own region; even his anger becometh like a 
boon.' Hearing those words given vent to by the great 
ascetic Sanatkumar the night-ranger Rāvana, being worked 
up with delight and surprise, began to meditate how he should 
enter into conflict with Hari." 

SECTION XLIV.
`````````````

"The vicious-souled Rāvana thinking thus the great 
ascetic again gave vent to accents. 'O thou having long 
arms, what thou hast desired in thy mind shall be 
encompassed in the great encounter. Be thou happy and wait 
for some time.' Hearing this the long-armed (Rāvana) 
again said to the ascetic—'Do thou tell me at length what 
are his marks.' Hearing the words of the lord of Rākshasas, 
the ascetic replied:—'Hearken, I shall relate to thee every 
thing, O foremost of Rākshasas. That great deity pervadeth 
all, is minute, invisible ever-existing, and manifest over the 
universe consisting of mobile and immobile creations. He 
is present in the celestial region, in the earth, in the region 
underneath the earth, on the mountains, in the forests, in all 
stationary objects, in all rivers and in all cities. He is Om, 
truth, Sābitri and earth. He is known as the deity 
Dharādhara (holder of earth) and Ananta. He is day, night, 
morning and evening, Yama, the moon, Kāla, the wind, 
Brahmā, Rudra, Indra and water. He makes the world 
manifest and shine; he creates them, destroys them and 
governs them. He sporteth, is eternal, the lord of men, 
Vishnu, Purana and the only destroyer of the world. What 
is the use of speaking more, O Dasānana, He comprehends 
the three worlds, the mobile and immobile. Wearing a 
yellow raiment like unto the filaments of lotus, Nārāyana, 
resembling dark-blue lotus in colour, is resplendant like unto 
clouds in the welkin accompanied by lightning. And 
covering his person, Lakshmi, in the shape of warfare, lies 
stationed in his body like unto lightning in the clouds. The 
celestials, Asuras or Nāgas—none is capable of casting his 
looks upon him. He alone can see him with whom he is 
pleased, O my son; neither by the fruits of sacrifices, 
asceticism, self-control, gifts, sacrifices, nor by anything else can 
one behold the Illustrious Deity. Those alone can see 
Him, who have devoted themselves, their life and being, unto 
Him and who, by virtue of discriminative knowledge, have 
got their sins burnt. If thou art willing to behold him, hear, 
if thou dost like, I shall describe everything at length. At 
the end of the golden age and the beginning of Tretā Yuga 
the deity Nārāyana shall assume a human form for the 
benefit of men and celestials. A son by the name of Rāma 
shall be born unto Dasaratha, of the Ikshwāku race who 
shall govern earth. Rāma shall be highly effulgent, highly 
powerful and in patience like unto earth—and the enemies 
in the encounter shall not be able to eye him as they cannot 
the sun. In this wise the lord Nārāyana shall appear in a 
human form. At the behest of his sire, the pious and the 
high-minded Rāma shall sojourn in the forest of Dandaka 
in the company of his brother. His spouse the gracious 
Lakshmi, shall be celebrated under the appellation of Sitā. 
She will be born as the daughter of Janaka, the king of Mithilā 
and will come out of earth. In beauty she shall be matchless on 
earth and be gifted with auspicious marks and shall always 
follow Rāma like a shadow as the rays follow the moon. She 
will be graced with a good conduct, chaste and patient; and 
Sitā and Rāma shall always appear together like the rays of 
the sun. Rāvana, I have thus related to you everything about 
the Nārāyana, the great Brahman, eternal and 
incomprehensible.' O Rāghava, hearing those words, the highly powerful 
lord of Rākshasas began to concert plans for entering into 
conflict with thee. Meditating again and again over 
Sanatkumār's words and delighted he began to journey for battle." 
Hearing those words, Rāma, with his eyes expanded in surprise, 
was greatly wondered. And being delighted he again said 
to Agastya, the foremost of the wise:—"Do thou recount the 
ancient stories." 

SECTION XLV. 
````````````

The highly effulgent and illustrious Agastya, sprung from 
a vessel, again addressed the humble Rāma as the great 
Patriarch sprung from lotus spoke unto the Great Deity, 
he said to Rāma, having truth for his prowess:—"Do thou 
hear." Saying this, the highly effulgent Agastya began to 
narrate the last portion of the story. The high-minded saint, 
with a delighted heart, described unto Rāma all he had heard 
and narrated. "O high-minded Rāma, having long arms, it is 
for this reason that the vicious-souled Rāvana stole away 
Janaki, the daughter of king Janaka. O thou having long 
arms! O thou of many glories! O thou invincible! Nārada 
recounted this story unto me on the summit of the 
mountain-chief Meru. O Rāghava, the highly effulgent one narrated unto 
me the last portion of this story in the presence of the 
celestials, Gandharvas, Siddhas, ascetics and other great men. 
O lord of kings, O conferrer of honors, do thou listen to that
story which removeth monstrous iniquity. Hearing this, 
O thou having long arms, the Rishis, and the celestials with 
delighted hearts, said to the ascetic Nārada He who shall 
reverentially listen to this story every day, shall be blessed 
with sons and grandsons and be honored in the region of the 
celestials." 

SECTION XLVI. 
`````````````

"Thereupon being desirous of achieving victories, 
Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, proud of his strength, began 
to journey over the earth in the company of the heroic 
Rākshasas. Whoever, amongst the Daityas, Dānavas and 
Rākshasis was reported to him as being powerful he used to 
invite for battle. O king of earth, having thus traversed the 
whole world, the ten-necked demon saw the saint Nārada 
returning to his own region from Brahmaloka. Like the 
second sun he was proceeding through the clouds. Rāvana, 
with a delighted heart, neared him and addressed the celestial 
saint Nārada with folded palms, saying:—'O thou gifted with 
six sorts of wealth, thou hast seen many a time all creations 
from Brahmā down to an insect. Do thou tell me, O great 
one, the inhabitants of which world are more 
powerful? I wish to fight with them according to my desire.' 
Whereto, thinking for a moment, the celestial saint Nārada 
replied:—'O king, there is an insular continent near the 
milky ocean. All the inhabitants that live there are gifted 
with strength—effulgent like the rays of the moon, 
huge-bodied, highly powerful and have a voice deep as the muttering 
of the clouds. They are all greatly beautiful, patient and 
have huge arms. O king of Rākshasas, I have seen in 
Swetadwipa such powerful men, as thou dost want to see 
on this earth.' Hearing the words of Nārada, Rāvana 
said:—'O celestial saint, why are the inhabitants of Swetadwipa 
powerful? And how did those high-souled ones come to 
live there? O lord, do thou relate to me everything at length. 
Thou dost observe the whole universe like a myrobalam
in thy palms.' Hearing the words of Rāvana, the celestial 
saint said:—'O lord of Rākshasas, the inhabitants of 
Swetadwipa are perpetually devoted unto Nārāyana with 
whole-mindedness and earnestly worship Him. They have 
always their hearts and minds devoted unto Him and are all 
high-souled. Having rendered their lives and souls unto 
Nārāyana, they have been blessed with their abode in 
Swetadwipa. Those, who are slain in the encounter with his bow 
bent by Vishnu—the holder of discus and the preserver of the 
world, attain to the celestial region. Neither by sacrifice, 
devout penance, self-control nor excellent gifts may be 
obtained the celestial region full of bliss.' Hearing the 
words of Nārada, the Ten necked demon was worked up 
with surprise and meditating for some time said 'I shall 
enter into conflict with him.' Thereupon inviting Nārada 
he proceeded to Swetadwipa. Thinking for a long time and 
being curious to witness that wondrous encounter, Nārada 
speedily went there. He was ever fond of sport and warfare. 
Filling all the quarters with dreadful leonine roars Rāvana with 
all the Rākshasas moved towards the Swetadwipa. After 
Nārada had reached there, the illustrious Daçānana went to 
that insular continent beyond even the reach of the celestials. 
Being struck by the radiant heat of that insular continent, 
the Puspaka car, of the mighty Rāvana, could not stand there 
like clouds scattered by the wind. Having arrived at that 
dreadful insular continent the councillors of the lord of 
Rākshasas, fearfully said to Rāvana. 'O lord, we are all 
stupified and beside ourselves with fear. We cannot 
anyhow stand here; how shall we fight?' Saying this the 
Rākshasas fled away into all directions. And Daçānana too 
sent away his golden car Pushpaka with them. Having thus 
sent away his chariot and assuming a dreadful figure he alone 
entered Swetadwipa. At the time of his entering he was 
seen by the females there. One of them holding him by the 
hand and smiling said 'Why hast thou come hither? Who 
art thou? Who is thy father? and what for hast thou come here? 
Do thou definitely say.' Hearing those words, O king, 
Rāvana, in anger said:—'I am the son of the ascetic Visrava, 
I am Rāvana by name; I have come hither being desirous 
of fighting; but I do not behold anyone here.' The 
vicious-souled Rāvana having said this all the young damsels laughed 
gently. But one of them, being enraged, took up Rāvana, 
like a child, as if in sport and hurled him amongst her 
companions. And addressing another she said:—'Behold, 
I have caught this black Rāvana, having twenty arms and 
ten faces, like a small insect.' Thereupon Rāvana, being 
worn out with hurling, passed from one one hand to another. 
Being thus hurled the learned and powerful Rāvana, in anger, 
severely bit the palms of that fair one. Being overwhelmed 
with pain that damsel let him off. Thereupon, another, 
taking that Rākshasa-chief, rose up in the welkin. Rāvana, 
again waxing wroth tore her with his nails. And being 
left off by that damsel, the terrified night-ranger fell down 
into the waters of the deep. The females, inhabiting that 
insular continent again and again in this wise hurled Rāvana. 
Beholding him thus distressed the highly effulgent Nārada 
danced in joy and surprise. O thou having long arms, being 
apprised of this, the vicious-souled Rāvana stole away Sitā 
with a view to meet death at thy hands. Thou art Nārāyana, 
holding discus, conch and club; thou hast in thy hands the 
bow, a lotus, thunder-bolt and other weapons; thou art 
worshipped of all deities; thou art graced with the mystic 
mark Sribatsa, adored by all celestials, hast a lotus navel, 
art a great ascetic, and Hrishikesha declaring fearlessness 
unto all devotees. Thou hast assumed a human form to bring 
about the destruction of Rāvana. Dost thou not recognise 
thyself as Nārāyana? O great one, do not forget thyself; 
do thou recollect thy real self. The Patriarch Brahmā said 
that thou art subtler than the subtle. Thou art the the three 
qualities, the three Vedas and the regions—that of the 
celestials, of the mortals and the region under the earth. 
Thy work is manifest in time, past, present and future; thou 
art the observer of three Vedas and the destroyer of the 
enemies of the celestials. With thy three steps, thou didst, 
in the days of yore, traverse the three worlds. Thou wert 
born of Aditi, as the youngest brother of Indra for binding 
Bali. Thou art the eternal Vishnu. To extend thy favours 
unto humanity thou hast been born as man. O foremost of 
the celestials, the work of the deities hath been 
accomplished. The vicious Rāvana, with his sons and relatives, 
hath been slain. The Rishis, having piety for their wealth 
and all the deities have been pleased. O foremost of 
gods—all this hath been brought about by thy favours; 
and the whole universe hath been pacified. Sitā is the very 
personation of Lakshmi, sprung from earth. It is for thee 
that she hath been born in the race of Janaka. Bringing 
her into Lankā Rāvana protected her with care like his 
mother. Rāma, I have thus related to thee the entire 
story. Hearing this from the Rishi Sanatkumar, the 
long-lived Nārada described this unto me. Daçānana, to a 
letter I followed the instructions of Sanatkumar. Who ever 
listens to this story at the time of Sraddha, the rice, offered 
by him, becoming inexhaustible, reaches his manes." 
Hearing this celestial theme, the lotus-eyed Rāma along with 
his brothers was greatly surprised. And having their eyes 
expanded with delight the monkeys, with Sugriva, the 
Rākshasas with Bibhishana, the kings with their councillors, 
and all other assembled pious Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, 
and Sudras, delightedly espied Rāma. Thereupon the highly 
effulgent Agastya said to Rāma:—"O Rāma, we have all 
seen thee and been honoured; now we shall depart." 
Saying this, they, being honored, repaired to their respective 
habitations. The sun set, Rāma, the foremost of men, gave 
farewell to monkeys and their king and duly went through the 
Sandhya rite. Gradually night set in and he entered the 
inner appartment. 

SECTION XLVII. 
``````````````

Kakutstha, knowing himself, being thus duly installed, 
the first night, enhancing the delight of the citizens, was spent. 
At dawn, the prisoners, to wake up the king, arrived at the 
palace. And those songsters, well trained and having a 
musical voice like the Kinnaras, began to eulogize the heroic 
king, to the increase of his joy. "Awake, O gentle hero, 
increasing Kausalyā's joy, O foremost of men. Thyself being 
asleep the whole universe will be laid up with sleep. In 
prowess thou art like Vishnu, in beauty thou art like two Aswins, 
in intellect thou art like Vrihaspati and in the capacity of 
governing thou art like the Patriarch Brahmā. Thy patience 
equals that of earth, thy effulgence equals that of the sun, thy 
velocity equals the wind and thy gravity resembles the deep. 
Thou art stable like a stake, gentle like the moon. No king 
like thee had flourished before—no other shall follow. O 
foremost of men, thou art irrepressible, ever pious and 
engaged in bringing about welfare unto thy subjects. Fame 
and wealth shall never renounce thee. O Kākutstha, in thee 
are perpetually stationed grace and wealth." Thus did the 
panegyrists eulogise him in various sweet accents and Rāghava 
got up. Like unto Hari rising up from the bed of serpents 
Rāma, thus eulogized, rose up from his bed covered with a 
a white coverlet. Taking white vessels full of water, 
thousands of well-trained survitors stood waiting before the 
high-souled (Rāma). Washing his mouth, being purified and 
offering oblation unto fire, he entered the holy room of the 
tutelary deity much honored by the Ikshwākus. And there 
having worshipped duly the celestials, manes and the 
Brahmins, he, encircled by men, came to the outer apartment 
And there arrived the leading priests headed by Vasishtha 
and ministers all resplendant like unto fire. And there sat 
around Rāma the Kashatrya kings hailing from various 
provinces as the celestials sit encircling their lord Indra. 
The illustrious Bharata, Lakshmana and Satrughna began to 
worship him and he appeared like a sacrifice conducted by 
Vedic hymns. And the servants, with their eyes shut, sat 
around him. The twenty heroic monkeys headed by the 
highly powerful Sugriva also began to worship him. As the 
Guhyakas worship Kuvera so Bibhishana, accompanied by 
four Rākshasas, waited upon him. All those who were 
advanced in the study of Vedas, born in respectable families, 
and learned, bowed unto the king lowering their beads. 
Like unto the celestial-king Indra worshipped by the saints 
the king Rāma was being perpetually honored by the effulgent 
saints, kings, monkeys, and Rākshasas. He appeared more 
beautiful than Indra at that time. And religious themes were 
recited in that assembly by persons conversant with the 
knowledge of Puranas. 

SECTION XLVIII. 
```````````````

Thus did the long-armed Rāma spend his days looking 
into all administrative works relating to the city and 
provinces. Some days having elapsed, he, with folded hands, 
said to Janaka, the king of Mithilā, "Thou art our only 
refuge—we have been reared by thee and by the help of thy 
dreadful prowess we have been able to destroy Rāvana. 
O king, the relation between the families of Ikshwāku and 
Mithilā, is unequalled and delightful. Taking the jewel, do 
thou proceed to thy own city and Bharata as a help shall 
follow thee." Saying "So be it," the king Janaka bespoke 
Rāma "O king, I have been delighted with seeing thee and thy 
courteous manners. The jewels collected for me, I do confer 
upon my two daughters." The royal saint Janaka having 
gone away, Rāma, with folded hands and humbly said to his 
maternal uncle Kaikeya—"O king, this kingdom, myself, Bharat 
and Lakshmana are all at thy disposal. The old king might 
have been grieved for thy long absence. It therefore behoveth 
thee, O king, to go there to-day. With immense wealth and 
various jewels let Lakshmana follow thee." Agreeing with 
his request Yudhājit said, "O Rāghava, let jewels 
and wealth be be inexhaustible with thee." Thereupon, 
Rāma, at first saluted and went round him and then 
Yudhājit, the son of Kekaya, went away to his kingdom in 
the company of Lakshmana like unto Indra (leaving for home) 
in the company of Vishnu on the destruction of the Asura 
Vitra. Having bade adieu unto his maternal uncle Rāma 
embraced his friend Pratardana, the undaunted king of 
Kashi and said:—"Thou hast displayed thy brotherly feelings 
and delight by making arrangements for my installation in 
the company of Bharata. O king, do thou now leave for thy 
city Baranushi, highly picturesque, well-guarded, girt by 
strong walls on all sides and having well-decorated 
gate-ways." Saying this, Rāma, the descendant of Kākutstha 
rose up from his seat and embraced him cordially. Having 
taken farewell from Rāma enhancing Kausalya's delight, the 
king of Kashi, with his followers, fearlessly and speedily 
proceeded to his own city. Having bade adieu to the king of 
Kashi, Rāma, with a smiling countenance and sweet accents, 
said to the three hundred assembled kings: "Being well 
protected by your own prowess, you have all displayed your 
great love for me. By your piety, truthfulness, sagacity and 
strength, the vicious-souled Rāvana hath been slain. 
Forsooth, I am merely the instrument in the destruction of 
Rāvana—he hath been slain by your strength. Hearing that 
Sitā, the daughter of Janaka, had been stolen away from the 
forest the high-minded Bharata did bring you all—but 
fortunately you were not constrained to go through miseries. 
High-minded as you are, you were all prepared for this 
work. Long since you have come here. I think it 
better that you should proceed to your respective 
habitations." Whereto the kings, greatly delighted, replied: 
"O Rāma, it is by thy good fortune that thou hast 
come off victorious and been installed on the throne; it is 
by thy good luck that thou hast got back Sitā and the 
enemy Daçānana hath been vanquished. That we behold 
thee, O Rāma, victorious and freed from all enemies, is our 
great benefit and delight. The encomiums, thou hast 
showered upon us, are natural with thee. Thou art Rāma, 
who always pleases people. Thou art worthy of being 
praised but we do not know how to praise thee. With thy 
permission we shall now leave for our respective provinces 
but thou shalt always reside in our hearts. O thou having 
long arms, O great king, mayst thou have that love for us 
perpetually that we may find place in thy heart." Whereto 
Rāma replied saying "So be it." Thereupon the kings, highly 
delighted and desirous of going, bade farewell unto Rāma, 
with folded palms and being honored by him, left for their 
respective kingdoms. 

SECTION XLIX. 
`````````````

Having agitated the earth with thousands of elephants 
and horses the kings proceeded to various quarters. And 
being prepared to help Rāma many Akshauhini soldiers with 
many steeds waited at Ayodhyā at the command of Bharata. 
Those kings, proud and powerful, spoke to one another—"We 
did not face Rāvana—the enemy of Rāma; Bharata did 
uselessly invite us after the destruction of Rāvana. Had 
they brought us earlier, we would, forsooth, have slain him. 
We would have, on the other side of the ocean, well 
protected by the prowess of Rāma and Lakshmana, and freed from 
all disturbances, fought at pleasure." Being thus delighted, 
all those assembled princes proceeded to their respective 
kingdoms, dwelling on these and various other topics. And 
having arrived at their celebrated cities, unscathed, 
abounding in delighted people, wealth, crops and jewels 
they sent various presents of jems to Rāma for his 
satisfaction. Besides this they made over to him innumerable horses, 
conveyances, infuriated elephants, sandal, excellent 
ornamants, jewels, pearls, corals, beautiful female servants and 
various cars. And taking all those jewels, the highly 
powerful Bharata, Lakshmana and Satrughna returned to their 
own city. Having arrived at the picturesque city Ayodhyā 
those foremost of men, made presents of various jewels unto 
Rāma. Having delightedly accepted those gifts Rāma in 
return made presents of them unto the successful king 
Sugriva, Bibhishana and other Rākshasas and monkeys 
by whose help he had achieved victory. And those highly 
powerful monkeys and night-rangers wore on their heads 
and arms those jewels conferred on them by Rāma. Having 
placed on his lap the long-armed Angada and Hanumān, the 
mighty car-warrior—the lotus-eyed Rāma said to Sugriva 
"Angada is thy good son and Hanumān is thy wise 
councillor. O Sugriva, these are always engaged in my 
well-being and in giving me good counsels. For thee, therefore, 
O king of monkeys, I should honor them in various ways." 
Having said this, the illustrious Rāma took off from his arms 
valuable ornaments and adorned Angada and Hanumān 
therewith. Thereupon having welcomed and casting loving 
looks upon the highly powerful and leading monkeys such 
as Neela, Kesarin, Kumuda, Gandhamādana, Sushena, 
Panasa, Mainda, Dwivida, Jāmbavān, Gabāksha, Dhumra, 
Baleemukha, Prajaghna, Saunāda, Dareemukha, Dadbimuka, 
Indrajānu and others, he addressed them all in sweet accents, 
saying:—"You are all my friends like unto my limbs and 
brothers. O ye inhabitants of forests, you have saved me 
from the ocean of danger. Blessed is the king Sugriva and 
blessed are the friends like yourselves." Saying this Rāma, 
the foremost of men, conferred upon them duly many 
precious clothes and ornaments and embraced them all. The 
monkeys lived there all happily feasting on fragrant honey, 
well-cooked meat and various fruits and roots. In this way 
they spent more than a month—but it appeared to them as
a moment on account of their devotion unto Rāma. He, too 
also spent his time happily with monkeys assuming shapes 
at will, the highly powerful Rākshasas and the mighty 
bears. In this way the delighted monkeys and Rākshasas 
spent the second winter month. Enjoying delight they thus 
spent their days happily in the city of Ayodhyā working to 
the welfare of Rāma. 

SECTION XLX. 
````````````

In this wise, the monkeys, bears and Rākshasas spent 
their days in Ayodhyā. Thereupon the highly effulgent 
Rāma, the descendant of Raghu said to Sugriva:—"O gentle 
one, proceeding to the city of Kishkindhā, hard to be got at 
by the celestials and Asuras, do thou reign there undisturbed 
with thy councillors. O thou having long arms, always look 
towards Angada, with loving eyes. Do thou, O Sugriva, 
protect lovingly the highly powerful Hanumān, Nala, thy 
father-in-law Sushena, the mighty Tāra, irrepressible Kumada, 
the powerful Neela, the heroic Satabali, Mainda, Dwivida, 
Gaya, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarava, the irrepressible and 
powerful king of bears Jamvaban, Gandhamādana, valiant 
Rishava, Supatala, Keshan, Sarabha and Sumbha—these 
and other heroic monkeys who dedicated their lives to my 
service. Do thou never act to their displeasure." Having 
said this and embraced Sugriva again and again Rāma 
addressed Bibhishana with sweet accents. "I know thou 
art cognizant of piety; the citizens, thy councillors and 
thy brother Kuvera also love thee; do thou therefore 
go and govern Lankā piously, O king; never cherish 
any vile intention; the honest kings always enjoy 
the earth. And my only request to thee, O king, is 
that thou mayst with love remember me and Sugriva. Do 
thou now proceed, divested of sorrow." Hearing the words 
of Rāma, the bears, monkeys and Rākshasas repeatedly 
exclaimed glory unto Rāma and said "O Rāma, having long 
arms, thy understanding resembleth that of the Self-Sprung, 
thy prowess is equally wonderful and thy beauty is also 
*par excellence*." The monkeys and Rākshasas having 
said this, Hanumān bowing, said unto Rāma "May my 
loving reverence be always in thee, O king; may 
my devotion unto thee remain unshaken, O hero; and may 
my mind be not attached unto any other thing. May my 
life remain in my body as long as the stories of Rāma shall 
be in currency on earth. Let not this prove otherwise. 
O foremost of men, O descendant of Raghu, may the Apsarās 
make me always hear of thy themes. O hero, as the winds 
scatter the clouds so I shall remove my anxiety by listening 
to thy nectar-like themes." After Hanumān had said this, 
Rāma rose up from his throne and having embraced 
Hanumān affectionately said, "O foremost of monkeys, what thou 
hast said, shall undoubtedly be carried out into action. As 
long as my stories shall be current on earth thy fame shall 
exist and life shall be in thy body. And as long as the world 
shall exist my themes shall be related. I cannot, even at 
the sacrifice of my life, release myself from the debts of one 
good service out of the many, thou hast done for me, 
monkey; and I shall for ever remain indebted to thee for 
thy last benefaction. Or let them wear out in me, for men, 
at the time of danger, become worthy of having their benefits 
returned." Having said this, Rāma took off from his 
neck a chain set with sapphires brilliant as the rays of 
the moon and placed it round the neck of Hanumān. 
Like unto the mountain Sumeru beautified by the rising of 
the moon on its summit, Hanumān, the foremost of monkeys, 
appeared graceful with the chain placed on his breast. And 
hearing the words of Rāghava, the highly powerful monkeys, 
one by one, saluted Rāma, touching his feet and went away. 
Both Sugriva and the virtuous-souled Bibhishana embraced 
Rāma and three of them were beside themselves with tears. 
And other monkeys and Rākshasas were all moved with 
tears and sorrow to take leave of Rāma. Having received 
favours thus from the high-souled Rāghava the monkeys 
went away to their own houses like-unto bodied creatures 
leaving off their bodies. Thereupon the Rākshasas, bears, 
monkeys, having bowed unto Rāma, the glory of the Raghu 
family and with their eyes full of tears consequent upon his 
separation, went away to the countries from which they had 
hailed. 

SECTION LI. 
```````````

Having bade adieu unto bears, monkeys and Rākshasas 
the long-armed Rāma began to live happily in the 
company of his brothers. Thereupon he and his brothers 
heard from the air the following sweet accents:—"O 
gentle Rāma, do thou with a delighted countenance 
behold me. O lord, know me as Pushpaka coming from 
the abode of Kuvera. O foremost of men, at thy 
command I did go there to carry him. But he said to 
me:—'Having slain the irrepressible Rāvana in battle the 
high-souled Rāma, the foremost of men, hath conquered thee. I 
have greatly been delighted on the destruction of the 
vicious-souled Rāvana, with his relatives, sons and friends. 
O gentle one, the great Rāma hath conquered thee in Lankā; 
I permit thee, therefore to convey him. Thou art the fit 
conveyance for traversing all regions. But my earnest 
desire is that thou shouldst take Rāma, the descendant of 
Raghu. Do, thou therefore go there at pleasure without 
any sorrow.' Hearing this command of the high-souled 
Kuvera I have come to thee. Do thou fearlessly accept 
me. I am above the conquest of all the worlds. At the 
command of Kuvera I shall valiantly traverse all regions 
carrying out your behests." Hearing the words of 
Pushpaka, the highly powerful Rāma said to the returning 
car stationed in the welkin:—"O foremost of cars, 
Pushpaka, if such be the case, do thou come here; while the 
lord of wealth hath commanded thus, I will not be 
blameable for bad character." Having said this and 
worshipped it with dried paddy, fragrant flowers and 
incense, Rāma, having long arms, addressed Pushpaka—"Do 
thou go now and come here whenever I shall remember thee. 
While proceeding by the welkin, O gentle one, be not 
sorry for our separation. And be not obstructed in thy 
course whilst traversing all the quarters." Having been 
adored by Rāma and saving 'So be it' Pushpaka proceeded 
towards its wished-for direction. And the holy Pushpaka 
car having thus vanished, Bharata, with folded palms, said 
to Rāma, the delight of Raghus—"O hero, during thy 
divine administration, we have seen many inhuman creatures 
and objects speak like men. During all these months 
since thy installation subjects have not suffered from any 
disease. Even the most aged animals have not met with
death. The female, without any risk, have been giving birth 
to children and all people are plump and delighted. The
delight of the citizens hath been greatly increased, O 
king. Indra hath been pouring nectar-like showers in
due time. The wind is always delightful and wholesome. 
O king of men, the inhabitants of the city and provinces 
are all saying 'We may have for ever such a king.'" 
Hearing those sweet accents given vent to by Bharata, Rāma, 
the foremost of kings was greatly delighted. 

SECTION LII. 
````````````

Having sent away the golden Pushpaka, the highly 
powerful Rāma entered the Asoka forest beautified by 
sandal, Aguru, Mangoe, dark sandal and Debadaru trees, 
and covered with Champaka, Aguru, Nāga, Kesara, Madhuka, 
Panasa, Sarja, Pārijāta, resembling smokeless fire, Sodhra, 
Neepa, Arjuna, Nāga, Saptaparna, Muktaka, Mandāra, 
Kadalee and various creepers, abounding in Priyanga, 
Kadamba, Vakula, Jambu, pomegranate, and Kadali trees, 
containing various flowers, picturesque, having many fruits, 
fragrant, decorated with new leaves and adorned with various 
other trees. There were many a tree, having profuse foliage 
and flowers and covered with maddened black bees as if 
constructed by architects. The forest-land was variegated 
and beautified by cuckoos, the ornaments of mangoe trees, 
black-bees and various birds of various colours. Amongst 
the trees beautifying the forest some were gold-hued, some 
were radiant as the flame of fire and some were like red 
collyrium. There were various flowers, spreading fragrance 
and making garlands. And there were various ponds filled 
with pure water. The stairs of those ponds were made of 
corals and the ground was of crystal. And they were all 
filled with lotuses and lilies. They were beautified with 
Chakrabakas and the banks were graced with variegated 
trees and flowers. And the forest was encompassed by 
stone walls and in the inside were dwelling many a Sārdula 
bird resembling *Vaiduryas*. All the trees in the forest were 
filled with flowers. And the rocks there, covered with flowers 
falling down from trees, appeared like welkin beautified 
with stars. And Rāma's Asoka forest was like unto 
Indra's Nandana and Kuvera's Chitraratha made by Brahmā. 
Having entered the rich Asoka forest abounding in many 
seats and houses and creepers Rāma sat on an excellent 
seat, covered with a beautiful coverlet and well constructed. 
Like unto Purandara with Sachi he took Sitā by the hand, 
made her sit and drink the wine distilled in the province 
of Mira. And in no time the servants brought for him 
well-cooked meat and various fruits. Being inebriete the 
beautiful Apsarās, well-skilled in the art of singing and 
dancing, began to dance before Rāma in the company of 
Kinnaris. The virtuous-souled Rāma, the foremost of those 
who know how to please, satisfied those beautiful damsels 
adorned with various ornaments. And Sitā sitting by him, 
he appeared like the effulgent Vasishtha in the company of 
Arundhati. Being greatly delighted the celestial-like Rāma 
pleased every day Sitā resembling a celestial damsel. Sitā 
and Rāghava thus spent their days happily. And thus was 
spent the delightful winter giving all enjoyments. Enjoying 
various things the high-souled Rāma and Sitā spent ten 
thousand years. Once on a time, having performed all the 
religious ceremonies, in the fore part of the day, Rāma, to 
spend the evening, entered the inner apartment. Sitā, too, 
having performed all religious ceremonies, at first attended 
to the service of her mothers-in-law. Thereupon wearing 
a beautifully coloured cloth and being adorned with various 
ornaments Sitā appeared before Rāma like unto Sachi 
approaching the king of celestials in heaven. And beholding 
the auspicious signs of pregnancy in his spouse Rāma 
attained to excessive delight. Thereupon he said to the 
beautiful Sitā resembling a celestial damsel:—"O 
Vaidehi—signs of pregnancy are manifest in thee. 
What desires of thine can we satisfy?" Smiling 
a little the daughter of Janaka said:—"O Rāghava, I wish 
to behold the holy hermitages. I wish to salute the 
greatly effulgent Rishis living on fruits and roots and 
residing on the banks of the Ganges. I greatly desire, O 
Rāma, that I may spend even one night in the hermitage of 
the Rishis living on fruits and roots." Whereto replied 
Rāma of unwearied actions, saying "So be it. Believe me, 
O Vaidehi, that thou shalt undoubtedly go there to-morrow." 
Having thus addressed Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, 
Rāma, the descendant of Kākutstha, then issued out of the 
inner apartment and entered the middle one filled with his 
friends. 

SECTION LIII. 
`````````````

Rāma having taken his seat there, the experienced 
councillors encircling him began to dwell upon many amusing 
stories. Bijoya, Madhumatta, Kasyapa, Mangala, Kula, 
Surajni, Kalya, Vadra Dantavakta, Sumagadha—all 
delightedly began to introduce many amusings talks before 
the high-souled Rāma. Thereupon Rāma incidentally 
addressed them saying—"O Vadra, how do the inhabitants of 
the city and provinces talk about Sitā, Bharata, Lakshmana, 
Satrughna and the mother Kaikeyi? The kings, when they 
deviate from the paths of justice, become objects of censure in 
the houses of men and even in the forests as well." Rāma 
having said this, Vadra with folded hands replied:—"O king, 
the citizens speak many good things about thee; besides 
they dilate upon many things in their own houses regarding 
thine conquest acquired by the destruction of the Ten-necked 
demon." Hearing the words of Vadra, Rāma said:—"Without 
hiding any thing, do thou relate every thing from the 
beginning as they are; what good and bad things have been 
given vent to by the citizens. Hearing the good and bad 
opinions of the citizens I shall desist from bad actions and 
engage in good ones. Whatever vicious actions of mine 
are talked of by subjects in cities and provinces do thou 
relate unto me confidently and fearlessly." Hearing the 
sweet accents of Rāma, Vadra, with a quiescent mind and 
folded palms, said:—"Hear, O king, I shall relate to thee all 
those unpleasant things frequently dwelt upon by people in 
court-yards, markets, public roads, forests and, gardens. 
Indeed Rāma hath accomplished a wonderfully hard work; 
our ancestors, the celestials, the Dānavas—none heard of 
constructing a bridge over the ocean? Rāma hath slain 
the irrepressible Rāvana with his army and brought over 
the monkeys, bears and Rakhasas to his own side. Having 
discomfitted Rāvana, in the encounter Rāma hath released 
Sitā, but not being the least enraged on account of her
being touched by Rāvana he hath brought her to his 
own city. Rāvana did forcibly place Sitā on his lap; 
how can then Rāma enjoy delight in her company? 
Having taken her to the city of Lankā, Rāvana did keep 
her in the Asoka forest and Sitā was brought under the 
control of Rākshashes. Still Rāma hath not been worked
up with hatred by Sitā. From now we shall also brooke
the bad conduct of our wives—for the subjects always 
tread the footsteps of their King. O King, the subjects 
thus talk of many things in cities and provinces." 
Hearing those words of Vadra, Rāghava was greatly sorry 
and asked his friends saying "Do the subjects thus talk 
about me?" Thereupon lowering their heads and saluting 
him they all said to Rāghava, of a depressed 
mind—"For sooth, the subjects thus talk about." Thereupon 
Kākutstha, the slayer of enemies, hearing all those words, 
dismissed his friends. 

SECTION LIV. 
````````````

Having sent away his friends and determined what 
to do, Rāma, the delight of the Rāghus, commanded the 
warder, who was seated hard by, saying:—"Do thou 
speedily bring here, Lakshmana the son of Sumitra and 
gifted with auspicious marks, the great Bharata and the 
irrepressible Satrughna." Hearing the words of Rāma and 
placing his folded palms on his head the warder reached 
the house of Lakshmana and unobstructed entered therein.
And having saluted him, with folded palms he said to 
the high-souled Lakshmana:—"The King wishes to 
behold thee—do thou soon go there." Thereupon being 
apprised of Rāghava's command and saying "So be it," Saumitri 
ascended his car and went speedily towards Rāma's 
abode. Having beheld Lakshmana's departure the warder 
humbly went to Bharata and having blessed him with 
folded hands said:—"The King wishes to see thee." 
Hearing of the command of Rāma from the warder, the 
highly powerful Bharata at once got up from his seat
and proceeded on foot. Seeing Bharata's departure the 
warder speedily went to Satrughna and with folded hands 
said:—"Do thou come, O foremost Raghus, the King 
wisheth to behold thee." Hearing the words of the warder 
Satrughna lowered his head and rising up speedily 
proceeded to Rāma. Thereupon returning, the warder, with 
folded hands, communicated unto Rāma, the arrivals of 
his brothers. So long Rāma was engaged poorly in 
anxious meditation with his crown bent downwards. 
Informed of the princes' arrival he commanded the warder, 
"Do thou soon bring the princes here. My life depends 
upon them. They are my dearest life." Having obtained 
Rāma's command, the princes, clothed in white raiment, 
entered there, with folded palms and quiescent mind. 
Having entered there they saw that Rāma's countenance 
was shorn of beauty like unto the moon possessed by 
Rāhu, the setting sun and the withered lotus and his 
eyes were full of tears. Having approached him quickly, 
and saluted his feet they anxiously sat there.
Thereupon having wiped off his tears and embraced them 
with his arms he raised up the princes and pressed them 
to take their seats. Thereupon he said—"You are mine 
all; you constitute my life; O princes, I am governing the 
kingdom gained by you; you are all learned, pious and 
intelligent. Do ye follow the duties I point out." Rāma, 
the descendant of Kākustha having said this, they, with
anxiety and attention, awaited the orders of the king. 

SECTION LV. 
```````````

The princes were all waiting with a poorly heart when 
Rāma, with a dried countenance, addressed them, 
saying:—"May good betide you—do not act against my desire. Hear, 
what the citizens have been talking about me and Sitā. The 
citizens as well as the inhabitants of provinces have been
showering censures upon me. I have been pierced to the very 
vitals by those accusations. I have been born in the illustrious 
family of the high-souled Ikshwākus. Sitā hath been born
also in the holy family of the great Janaka; gentle Lakshmana, 
thou knowest how in the solitary forest of Dandaka, Sitā 
was stolen away by Rāvana and how have I slain him. At 
that time even I was stricken with anxiety regarding Sitā
that how I could take her home since she had resided in the 
house of the Rākshasas. To secure my confidence, Sitā, 
in your very presence, entered fire. At that time, O Saumitri, 
fire, carrying sacrificial oblations and the wind of the sky 
declared Sitā's innocence before the celestials. In the 
presence of all the Rishis and gods, the Sun and Moon 
announced the innocence of the daughter of Janaka. Indra, 
the king of the celestials, himself handed over the chaste 
Sitā unto me in the island of Lankā. My mind knoweth 
Sitā as chaste for ever. So, at that time I came back to 
Ayodhyā with Sitā. But now a great sorrow consequent 
upon the censure of the citizens and villagers hath pierced 
my heart. He, who is notorious on this earth and as 
long as that notoriety remains current, is classed amongst 
the vile. Even the celestials speak ill of bad 
name—whereas fame is adored in all the regions. 
Therefore the high-souled exert their best to acquire reputation. 
O foremost of men, what to speak of the daughter of 
Janaka—I can even renounce my life and yourselves in 
fear of a bad name. Do ye therefore perceive into what 
great abyss of sorrow and ill-fame I have fallen. Up to 
this time I have never experienced such a mighty grief. 
Do thou, O Lakshmana, next morning, ascending the car 
driven by Sumantra, take away Sitā to another country. 
There is a picturesque hermitage of the high-souled 
Vālmiki situate on the Tamasā on the Other side of the 
river Ganges. Do thou, O delight of Raghus, soon come 
back, leaving behind Sitā in that lovely place; Do thou 
carry out my words. Do thou not speak anything regarding 
Sitā's banishment, O Saumitri, if dost thou request me 
to desist from this, it shall be the more unpleasant unto 
me. For my life and arms, do ye not proffer any request 
unto me regarding this, If so, you shall only endanger 
my well-being and I shall ever regard you as my enemies. 
If you obey my behests, do ye honor my words now. 
Do ye take away Sitā from here. Ere this Sitā had 
communicated her intention of beholding the hermitages 
of ascetics on the banks of the Ganges. Let that desire 
of hers be now satisfied." While saying this, the eyes of 
the virtuous-souled Rāma were covered with tears. 
Sighing hard like unto an elephant, he, with a heart stricken 
with grief, departed to his own quarter in the company of 
his brothers. 

SECTION LVI.
````````````

The night being over, Lakshmana, with a poor heart 
and dried countenance, addressed Sumantra, saying:—"O 
charioteer, do thou soon yoke quick-coursing steeds to an 
excellent chariot, and for Sitā place an excellent seat on 
the car. At the command of the King, I shall take Sitā 
to the hermitage of the ascetics ever engaged in pious 
actions. Do thou soon bring the chariot here." Obeying the 
mandate, and bringing a beautiful and holy car drawn by 
first-rate steeds and having excellent seats, he said to Saumitri, the 
enhancer of friends’ honor "O lord, here is the chariot 
ready—do thou now satisfy thine desire." Hearing the words of 
Sumantra, Lakshmana, the foremost of men, approached Sitā 
in the inner apartment and said:—"O queen, thou didst 
request the king to show thee the hermitage—the king too 
did promise—he hath now commanded me to take thee 
there. Do thou therefore follow me, at the command of the 
king. I shall, at his behest, take thee to the forest where 
dwell many an ascetic." Hearing the words of the 
high-souled Lakshmana, Jānaki attained to excessive delight and 
became anxious to go. Taking various jewels and costly 
clothes she said to Lakshmana on the eve of her 
departure—"I shall confer these ornaments, these costly clothes and 
riches on the female ascetics." Saying "We shall do the same," 
he made Sitā ascend the car and remembering Rāma’s 
command proceeded, being carried by quick-coursing steeds. 
Thereupon Sitā said to Lakshmana, the enhancer of 
prosperity:—"O descendent of Raghu, I behold many 
inauspicious omens. My right eye and body are trembling. 
My mind is growing depressed. It is stricken with 
anxiety and I have accordingly grown restless. I behold 
the earth as void of all happiness. O thou fond of 
brothers—hath thy brother met with any calamity? Are all my 
mothers-in-law and subjects well?" Saying this Sitā, with 
folded hands, began to pray unto gods. Hearing this 
Lakshmana bowed unto her touching the ground with his 
crown, and though greatly sorry, said as if delighted "All 
well." Thereupon having arrived at the hermitage situate on 
the banks of Gomati Lakshmana spent the night there. 
Thereupon at dawn he rose up and asked the charioteer to get 
the chariot ready, saying, "Like unto the powerful Mahādeva 
we shall hold the waters of the Bhāgirathi on our head." 
Thereupon Sumantra yoked the horses, gifted with the fleet course 
of the mind, to the chariot and with folded hands said to 
Sitā. "Do thou ascend the car." According to the request of 
the intelligent charioteer, Sitā, with Lakshmana, ascended that 
excellent conveyance. In no time the daughter of Janaka, having 
expansive eyes, arrived at the banks of the Ganges removing 
all sins, Reaching the currents of Bhāgirathi before noon 
Lakshmana, on beholding her, cried aloud. Thereupon 
beholding Lakshmana thus distressed, Sitā, conversant with 
piety, waxing anxious said. "Why art thou weeping, 
Lakshmana? I have reached the banks of Janhavi, for which 
I have so long desired. So this is the time for rejoicing and 
do not give me pain at this time. O foremost of men, thou 
dost spend thine days and nights in the company of Rāma, 
Thou hast left him for two days only—art thou sorry for 
this? Lakshmana—Rāma is also dearer than my life—but 
I am not so sorry—do thou not be therefore overwhelmed 
with grief. Do thou take me to the other side of the Ganges 
so that I may behold the ascetics and confer upon them 
clothes and ornaments. Thereupon saluting them duly and 
spending a night we shall return to the capital. I am also 
anxious to sec Rāma, having eyes like lotus petals, 
breast like that of a lion and foremost of men." Hearing 
the words of Sitā and wiping his beautiful eyes, Lakshmana, 
the slayer of enemies, sent for boatmen. As soon as they 
were called, with folded hands they said. "The boat is 
ready." Having then brought a boat to cross the holy Ganges 
Lakshmana, with a quiescent mind, took her to the other 
side.

SECTION LVII. 
`````````````

Having at first conducted Sitā to the spacious and 
well decorated boat plied by fishermen Lakshmana himself 
got up. Thereupon he ordered Sumantra to wait there with 
the chariot, and being beside himself with sorrow ordered the 
sailors to move on. Thereupon having reached the other side 
of Bhāgirathi, Lakshmana, with subdued voice and folded 
palms, said to Sitā—"O daughter of the king of Videha, this 
hath pierced my heart like a dart, that my brother, by making 
me the instrumental of this action hath made me the 
object of censure in the world. The death and the 
pain consequent upon it are better than the action I am 
engaged in. Be thou propitiated, O beautiful damsel, do 
not hold me responsible for this." Saying this, the humble 
Lakshmana began to weep and pray for death. Beholding 
him thus overwhelmed, Sitā said "What is the matter, 
Lakshmana? I do not understand anything, Do thou 
speak out everything plainly unto me. I find thee beside 
thyself (with grief); is it all well with the kingdom? In 
the name of the king, do thou give out unto me, the cause 
of thy sorrow." Sitā having addressed him thus, Lakshmana, 
with a poorly heart and suppressed tone, said "O worshipful 
queen, I have kept within my heart all those words, which 
the king said, before he entered his palace, rendered sorry 
and impatient on hearing in the assembly the report of 
censure regarding thee, O daughter of king Janaka. All 
those words are indeed above description and so I desist. 
I only say so much, that afraid of the calumny of the citizens 
he hath renounced thee although thy purity was sufficiently 
proved before me. But for that, do not consider thyself 
in any way guilty. Rāma hath commanded me to leave thee 
near the hermitage on the pretext of satisfying thine desire 
as thou art big with a child. Do not uselessly give vent to 
sorrow any more. There is the holy hermitage of the saints 
on the banks of Jānhavi. There lives Vālmiki, the foremost 
of saints, a great friend of our sire Daçaratha. O daughter 
of Janaka, approaching that high-souled saint, do thou spend 
thy days happily keeping Rāma always in thy mind. Do thou 
satisfy the deities, O chaste damsel. This shall crown thee 
with auspiciousness." 

SECTION LVIII. 
``````````````

Hearing the ruthless words of Lakshmana, the daughter 
of Janaka, greatly sorry, fell down on earth. And remaining 
senseless for some time, Sitā, with her eyes full of tears 
said to Lakshmana:—"Forsooth, O Lakshmana, the great 
Dispenser hath created this body to suffer miseries; and 
all my afflictions are manifest in form to-day. Methinks; 
I committed a mighty iniquity in my pristine existence or
brought about separation between a husband and wife and 
for that Rāma hath renounced me albeit I am pure and 
chaste. O son of Sumitrā, the affliction of residing in the 
forest appeared to me as pleasure ere this for I knew that 
I would be able to serve Rāma's feet. But how shall I, O 
gentle one, live in the hermitage being divorced from all my
kith and kin? And being afflicted to whom shall I express 
my sorrow? What reply shall I offer unto the ascetics 
when they shall ask me 'Child; why hath the high-souled 
Rāghava renounced thee? What sin hast thou committed?' 
O Saumitri, shall I just renounce my life in the waters of 
Jāhnavi? But I desist from this for it shall bring about the 
termination of my husband's race. O Saumitri, do thou 
carry out the orders thou hast received. By renouncing 
this wretched wight do thou satisfy the King's orders. 
But hear, what I say. Without making any distinction, 
do thou, in my name, with folded hands, bow unto my 
mothers-in-law and then ask the well-being of the 
kingdom. Thereupon saluting the pious King do thou address 
him, in my name, saying:—'Thou knowest, O Rāghava, 
that Sitā is pure, ever devoted unto thee and engaged 
in thy well-being. She knows it full well, that afraid of 
a bad name thou hast renounced her. It is her duty to 
put a stop to thy ill-name and censure; for thou art 
her excellent refuge.' Do thou tell further-more that 
king established in righteousness to treat the citizens as 
his brothers, to acquire piety by protecting his subjects 
duly—for this is the greatest morality and by this may 
be acquired excellent fame. Tell him that I am not sorry 
for my person—my greatest sorrow is that the citizens 
have vilified me. Husband is a woman's god—her friend 
and spiritual guide. It is proper therefore to work out 
husband's well-being even at the sacrifice of life. Do 
thou, O Lakshmana, communicate it in short unto 
Rāma, in my name; Do thou go now and behold 
the signs of pregnancy are manifest in me." Sitā 
having said this, Lakshmana, with a bewildered heart, saluted 
her touching the ground with his head, he could not speak 
more. Thereupon bewailing aloud and circumambulating 
her, he, meditating a little, said. "What art thou speaking 
unto me, O worshipful dame? O thou having no sin, up to 
this time I have not seen any portion of thy beautiful person 
but feet. This is a solitary forest and besides the 
worshipful Rāma, is not present here—under these 
circumstances how can I cast looks upon thee?" Having addressed 
Sitā in this wise Lakshmana again sent for a boat and 
ascending it ordered the boatmen to go. Thereupon having 
reached the other side and being beside himself with sorrow 
and grief he speedily ascended the car. And casting his 
looks behind while proceeding he espied that Sitā, on the 
other side of the Ganges, was roving wildly like one having 
none to look after her. Looking again and again when 
Sitā saw that Lakshmana and the chariot have gone beyond 
the range of her vision, she became overwhelmed with 
anxiety and grief. Being sunk in grief and pressed down 
with the weight of sorrow on not beholding Rāma, the 
foremost of the illustrious, the chaste Sitā began to cry aloud 
in the forest resounded with the notes of peacocks. 

SECTION LIX.
````````````

Beholding Sitā thus wailing, the sons of the Rishis 
there speedily approached the great Vālmiki, well-established 
in asceticism. And saluting him they all communicated 
unto him Sitā’s bewailings and said, "O great sir, we 
do not know the wife of what great man, beautiful 
like the very Lakshmi, and not seen before, is crying aloud 
very poorly? It is better that thou shouldst see her once. 
That beautiful damsel, like a goddess falling from heaven 
being bewildered, is waiting on the banks of the river. We 
saw her alone crying aloud being overwhelmed with sorrow 
and grief as if she had none to look after her. A 
damsel like her should not be subject to such a 
condition. She did not appear to us to be a woman. Do 
thou receive her duly. She is near the hermitage and 
so hath come to seek thy shelter. O illustrious Sir, she 
is on the look out for a protector—do thou protect her." 
The pious Vālmiki could perceive every thing by virtue 
of his asceticism; and ascertaining the truth of the words 
of the Rishi boys by the power of his understanding, he, 
with quick steps, approached Sitā. And the disciples 
followed that high-minded ascetic. Thereupon proceeding 
a little on foot with Arghya in his hands, the wise 
Vālmiki reached the banks of the river and saw that 
Rāghava’s spouse was bewailing like a helpless woman. 
Having gladdened a little the aggrieved Sitā by virtue 
of his own effulgence the great ascetic Vālmiki addressed 
her in following sweet accents. "O chaste damsel, thou 
art the daughter-in-law of Daçaratha, the beloved wife 
of Rāma and the daughter of Janaka; thy coming here is 
auspicious. I am apprized, by virtue of asceticism and 
meditation, of the object of thy coming here. O great lady, 
I am also fully aware that thou art by all means chaste. 
In fact I am conscious of all the incidents in the three 
worlds. By the eyes of asceticism, I perceive, O daughter 
of Janaka, that thou art innocent. Thou hast come under 
my shelter, O Vaidehi—be thou consoled. O child, the 
pious ascetics live around my hermitage. They shall 
daily take care of thee as their daughter. Do thou accept this 
Arghya now, and confiding in me do thou remove thy grief. 
Be not sorry for anything; consider that thou hast come 
to thy own home." Hearing the wonderful words of the 
great ascetic, Sitā humbly touched his feet and said "Thy 
desire shall be fulfilled." Saying this, she, with folded 
hands, followed the ascetic. Beholding the great ascetic 
and Sitā approach, the wives of the Rishis, delighted 
neared them and said:—" Do thou come, O foremost of 
Rishis, thou hast arrived here after a long time. We all 
bow unto thee—do thou order what we shall do." Hearing 
their words the great Vālmiki replied in worthy 
accents—"This Sitā is the wife of the intelligent Rāma, the 
daughter-in-law of Daçaratha and the daughter of Janaka. She has 
now come to our hermitage. She is chaste and innocent, 
still her husband hath renounced her. So we should all 
protect her. She is worthy of your reverence—specially while 
such is the order of mine—your preceptor. So, do ye all 
take care of her with great affection." Having consigned the 
charge of Sitā unto the hands of the female ascetics, 
the great and illustrious ascetic Vālmiki, followed by his 
disciples, speedily proceeded towards his holy hermitage. 

SECTION LX. 
```````````

Beholding the great ascetic Vālmiki thus 
conducting Sitā into his own hermitage Lakshmana's heart was 
bewildered with grief. Thereupon he said to the expert 
charioteer Sumantra. "Do thou perceive Rāma's grief 
consequent upon the separation from Sitā. His 
spouse—the daughter of Janaka, is perfectly pure; what can be 
more painful than that Rāma is living alone having renounced 
her? It is clear unto me, O Sumantra, that this separation 
of Rāma, hath been brought about by the influence of 
destiny—for it is hard to get over accident. Even that 
Rāma, who, when enraged, is capable of slaying the 
celestials, Gandharvas, Asuras and Rākshasas, hath been engaged 
in the worship of destiny. Formerly did Rāma go through 
miseries, residing in the forest of Dandaka, at the 
command of his sire for fourteen years. But this banishment 
of Sitā appears to me as exceedingly painful and most 
ruthless. O charioteer, the opinion of the citizens is by no 
means just; consequently what shall we gain by 
performing such a bad action for fame as the exile of Sitā?" 
Hearing those words of Lakshmana, the wise Sumantra 
reverentially replied:—"Be not aggrieved for Sitā, O 
Saumitri. Formerly in the presence of thy sire the 
Brahmananas related this account of Sitā's exile. Rāma shall 
be deprived of all happiness and be separated from his 
dear wife; what more, the virtuous-souled Rāma, having 
long arms, shall, under the influence of time, renounce thee, 
Sitā, Satrughna and Bharata. O Lakshmana, when Durbasa 
was addressed by the king Daçaratha as to thy future he 
replied in the above way. I have told thee the same. Do thou 
not communicate this unto Satrughna, Bharata or any body. 
O foremost of men, Durbasa said this unto Daçaratha before 
me, Vasishtha and other great men. Hearing the words 
of Rishi, Daçaratha, the foremost of men, said unto me, 
'O charioteer, do not reveal this secret to any body.' O
gentle one, it is not proper by any means to falsify the words 
of the king Daçaratha. I shall always, very carefully, carry 
out his orders. It is not proper to reveal this mystery 
before thee. Still I do so for thy curiosity hath been greatly 
excited. Though this mystery was communicated formerly 
by the king Daçaratha and though it is not proper to reveal 
it to any body, still I express it before thee that thou mayst 
not, on hearing it, be worked up with sorrow; for destiny 
is hard to be got over. And it is by the influence of that 
destiny that thou hast met with such a sorrow and grief. 
However, do thou not reveal this secret unto Satrughna and 
Bharata." Hearing these grave and important words of 
Sumantra, Lakshmana ordered him to relate. 

SECTION LXI.
````````````

Being thus requested by the high-souled Lakshmana, 
Sumantra began to reveal the mystery of Durbāsā's account 
"In the days of yore the great ascetic Durbāsā, the son of 
Atri, resided for a year in the holy hermitage of Vasishtha. 
At that time thy sire, the highly effulgent and illustrious 
Daçaratha, with a view to see his high-souled priest 
Vasishtha, repaired there. He saw the great ascetic Durbāsā, 
burning like the sun in his effulgence, seated on the right 
hand side of Vasishtha. Thereupon he humbly saluted those 
two leading ascetics. And they too, welcoming him, received 
him duly with seat, water to wash feet, Arghya, fruits and 
roots. Then he lived there in the company of the ascetics. 
Thereupon during the noon, all those ascetics, seated there, 
began to dwell upon various pleasant topics. During an 
interval Daçaratha, with folded hands and uplifted arms, said 
to the high-souled son of Atri—Durbāsā, having asceticism 
for his wealth. 'O illustrious Sir, how long shall my family 
remain in existence? What is the extent of the lease of life 
granted to Rāma and my other sons? How long shall the 
descendants of Rāma live? And what shall be the end of 
my race? Do thou relate all this unto me.' Hearing the 
words of the king Daçaratha the highly effulgent Durbāsā, 
replied:—'Hear, the early history, O king. During the 
encounter between the celestials and Asuras, the demons, 
being remonstrated with by the celestials sought shelter 
of the wife of Vrigu—thy priest. Vrigu's wife having 
promised them help they lived there fearlessly. Having 
beheld the demons thus helped by Vriju's wife, Hari, the 
king of the celestials, enraged, chopped off her head with 
his sharp discus. And angry on beholding his wife slain, 
Vrigu, imprecated a curse on Vishnu, the slayer of enemies' 
race, saying—"Being beside thyself with anger thou hast slain 
my wife, not worthy of being killed; therefore, O Janārddana, 
thou shalt be born in the region of mortals. And there 
thou shalt remain separated from thy spouse for many long 
years." Having imprecated this curse, Vrigu was greatly 
pained and being propitiated by his adoration, Vishnu, fond 
of disciples, said: "Having slain Rāvana and others, I shall 
be, for the behoof of mankind, subject to this imprecation." 
O bestower of kings, the highly effulgent Vishnu, thus 
imprecated by Vrigu in the days of yore, hath been born as 
thy son in this birth and hath been celebrated under the 
appellation of Rāma. O conferrer of honors, for sooth shall 
Rāma partake of the fruits of Vrigu's curse. He shall reign in 
Ayodhyā for a long time. All his followers shall be happy and 
prosperous. Having reigned for eleven thousand years 
Rāma shall repair to the region of Brahmā. None shall 
be able to vanquish him. He shall celebrate many a 
horse-sacrifice with profuse gifts and shall establish many 
royal families. He shall beget on Sitā two sons.' 
Having thus related unto Daçaratha the past and future 
of his family the highly effulgent great ascetic Durbāsā 
became silent. He being silent—the great King Daçaratha, 
having bowed unto the two high-souled ascetics, again 
returned to his city Ayodhyā. I had heard there all these 
words of the great ascetic Durbāsā. Up to this time they 
are lying in my heart. Rishis' words shall never prove 
fruitless. According to the words of Rishi Rāma shall 
install two sons of Sitā in Ayodhyā, not anywhere else. 
Under these circumstances, O Lakshmana, thou shouldst 
not grieve for Sitā or Rāma; in their interest do thou 
become patient." Hearing those wonderous words of the 
charioteer Sumantra, Lakshmana became greatly happy 
and eulogised him again and again. They thus 
conversing with one another on their way back, the sun set. 
They accordingly spent that night on the banks of Kesini. 

SECTION LXII. 
`````````````

Having spent the night on the banks of Kesini, 
the mighty car-warrior Lakshmana got up early in the 
morning and again proceeded on his journey (home). 
And reached in the noon the city of Ayodhyā, filled with 
various jewels and delighted and plump citizens. But the 
high-souled Lakshmana became greatly sorry stricken with 
the thought as to what he should relate on approaching 
the feet of Rāma. Whilst proceeding with this thought 
he saw the highly picturesque palace of Rāma resembling 
the rays of the moon. Having descended from his car 
at the palace-gate, Lakshmana, the foremost of men, with 
his face downwards and a distressed heart, unobstructed, 
entered the palace. Having entered there he saw his 
elder brother Rāma seated poorly on an excellent seat 
with his eyes full of tears. Being greatly pained at the 
sight, Saumitri touched his feet and with folded palms 
said:—"O worshipful sir, having obeyed thy behests I
have left the daughter of Janaka at the holy hermitage 
of Vālmiki near the banks of the Ganges. Having left 
that illustrious pure lady at the skirt of the hermitage 
I have again dome to serve thy feet. Do thou not grieve, 
O foremost of men, for such is the course of time. The 
intelligent people like thee do not grieve. Where there is 
growth there is decay, where there is prosperity there is ruin, 
and where there is birth there is death. Therefore 
attachment unto wife, sons, friends and riches is not proper, for 
surely shall be brought about separation with them. Whilst 
thou canst control thyself and thy mind, shouldst thou not 
be able to bear this trifling pain of separation? Leading 
men like thyself are never overwhelmed by all these things. 
O Rāghava, thou shalt again be blamed by the people. In 
fear of this calumny, O sing that thou hast renounced 
Maithili. And if dost thou grieve for that spouse thy 
calumny shall undoubtedly be deep-rooted in the kingdom. 
Therefore do thou restore thyself patiently, O foremost of 
men. Do thou give up this weakness and be not sorry." 
The intelligent Lakshmana, the son of Sumitrā, having said 
this, Rāma, the descendant of Kākutstha and fond of 
friends, with great delight said:—"Thou hast spoken the 
truth, O Lakshmana, O foremost of men. I have been 
greatly delighted, O hero for thy carrying out my orders. O 
gentle Saumitri, my grief and sorrow have been removed 
for those pleasant words of thine." 

SECTION LXIII. 
``````````````

Hearing those wondrous words of Lakshmana Rāma
was greatly delighted and said "O thou having an auspicious 
look, thou art gifted with great intellect and after my heart; 
a friend like thee is rare at such a time. But O beautiful 
Saumitri, do thou, apprised of my intention, carry out my 
words. O gentle son of Sumitrā, for not looking to state 
business for these four days I have been pierced to the very 
vitals. Do thou therefore call here men, or women, priests 
or councillors who have come for business. For sooth do 
a king falls into the dreadful hell where the wind doth not 
blow, who does not daily look into his state affairs. I have 
heard, O foremost of men, that there lived in the days of 
yore a highly illustrious, truthful and pure-minded king, ever 
devoted unto the Brāhmanas, by the name of Nriga. Once 
on a time at the sacred pilgrimage of Pushpaka that king 
conferred upon the Brāhmanas one *Koti* of kine with 
calves adorned with golden ornaments. 
Accidentally on that occasion, a cow with calf belonging 
to a poor Brahman, living upon low means, was given 
away along with other kine. Undergoing hunger and thirst, 
the master of that lost cow travelled for a long time 
in many places in search of it. Thereupon having 
reached the province of Kanakhal he espied his own 
cow in the house of a Brāhmana. The cow was well kept 
and the young one was grown up. Thereupon the Brahman 
called the cow by the name given by him saying 'Savalā, 
come.' The cow heard that and recognizing the voice of the 
Brahman followed him. And he preceded her burning like fire. 
And the Brāhmana, in whose house the cow so long remained, 
speedily pursued her and approaching the ascetic said. 
'This cow is mine. The king Nriga conferred this upon 
me.' So there arose a great quarrel between the two 
learned Brāhmanas. And thus quarreling they both 
approached him who had given away the cow. And though 
they waited for a long time at the gate they did not obtain 
permission to enter the palace. Thereat both of them were 
greatly engraged and imprecated dreadful curses, saying 
'Since thou hast not granted us an interview though we 
have been waiting here for a long time, thou shalt, by our 
curse, remain invisible, being a lizard. Thou shalt in this 
state live in a den for many hundred and thousand years. 
When Vishnu assuming a human person shall be born in the 
Vasudeva family of Yadavas and enhance their glory he shall 
liberate thee from the curse. Immediately before the advent 
of the Kali Yuga the Rishi Nara Nārāyana gifted with great 
prowess shall descend upon earth to relieve her of the burden.' 
Having thus imprecated the curse upon the king the Rishis 
became silent. The cow was old and weak so they both, 
with mutual consent, conferred that upon another Brahman.
O Lakshmana, the king Nriga is still suffering from that 
dreadful curse. It is the king's folly that is manifest from 
the mutual disagreement of the workers. Do thou bring 
them all speedily to me who have come for business. For, 
sooth shall the kings profit by the just administration.
Do thou therefore go in person, O Lakshmana and see 
who hath come for business." 

SECTION LXIV.
`````````````

Hearing the words of the highly effulgent Rāma,
Lakshmana, conversant with discriminative knowledge, 
replied with folded hands, saying "O Kākutstha, it is 
for a very simple folly that the two Brāhmanas 
imprecated that Curse upon the king Nriga, dreadful as the 
rod of Yama. May I ask thee, O foremost of men, what 
did that King say unto the Brahmans when he was 
thus imprecated?" Whereto Rāma replied saying:—"O 
gentle one, hear, what the king Nriga said when 
imprecated. Hearing of the departure of the Brāhmanas he 
sent for his priest, minister, the citizens and subjects and 
filled with sorrow said:—'Do ye all hear attentively 
my words. Having imprecated a dreadful curse upon me 
the jolly saint Nārada and the ascetic Parvata have speedily, 
like the wind, repaired to the region of Brahmā. Do ye 
therefore, even today, place the prince Vasu on the 
throne, and let the architects prepare a pleasant den for 
me. Living therein I shall waste the curse of the Brahmans. 
Let the architects dig one den to protect me against the rains, 
one against the affliction of the winter and one against the 
distresses of summer. Let them enhance the picturesqueness 
of those dens by planting many trees having profuse 
branches and fruits and flowers. As long as time shall not 
change so long I shall spend my days happily in the den. 
For half a league on all sides around me let flower trees
be planted.' Having made those arrangements and placed 
Vasu on the throne the king Nriga said:—'Do not swerve 
from the path of morality, O my son, and do thou duly govern 
the subjects according to the custom of the Kshatryas. 
Thou hast seen, with thine own eyes, the curse that the 
Brāhmanas have given me being enraged for a very trifling 
folly of mine. Do thou not repent for me. My son, time 
is the lord of happiness and sorrow; it is by the influence 
of time that I have fallen into such a disaster. Creatures 
must meet with what is kept in store by destiny; they must 
go where they are bound for and they must 
acquire what is set apart for them. Pristine actions are the 
root of all these; so, be not sorry, O my son.' O 
foremost of men, having given this advice unto his son, the 
highly illustrious king Nriga proceeded to live in the sweet 
fragrant den. Having entered the den filled with many 
jewels the high-souled king began to spend his days in the 
satisfaction of the curse imprecated by the two Brāhmanas." 

SECTION LXV. 
````````````

"I have thus given unto thee an account of the curse 
imprecated on Nriga. Listen, if dost thou wish to hear of
any other theme." Rāma having said this Lakshmana 
replied:—"I am not satiated with the account of those 
wonderful stories, O king." Hearing the reply of 
Laksmana, Rāma, the descendant of Ikshwāku, began again 
with themes instinct with morality:—"There lived a highly 
pious and powerful king by the name of Nimi. He was 
the twelfth of Ikshwāku's sons. That powerful king made a 
picturesque city like that of the celestials near the 
hermitage of Gautama. The name of that beautiful city 
was Vaijayanta and the highly illustrious royal saint 
used to live there. Having thus reared a highly 
picturesque city he thought of worshipping the deity by 
celebrating a sacrifice for the satisfaction of his 
sire. Having thus resolved and invited his sire Ikshwāku 
the son of Manu, he first welcomed the celestial saint. Nimi 
the descendant of Ikshwāku, then welcomed the saints Atri, 
Angiras and Vrigu having asceticism for their wealth. 
Thereupon Vasishtha said to Nimi, the foremost of royal 
saints—'I have already been engaged by Indra. Do thou therefore 
wait as long as his sacrifice is not finished there.' After 
the departure of Vasishtha the great Gautama engaged in 
the satisfaction of Vasistha's duties. And the high-souled 
Vasishtha too engaged in Indra's sacrifice. On the 
other hand having united all the Brahmans the great 
king began to celebrate the sacrifice extending over five 
thousand years near his city by the side of the 
Himalaya. Thereupon having finished the sacrifice of 
Indra there came to the King, the blameless and the 
illustrious Rishi Vashishtha. Finding Gautama engaged 
in his room he was exceedingly enraged. Thereupon 
he waited there for some time to see the King. On that 
day the royal saint Nimi was deeply asleep. And not 
beholding the King the high-souled Vasishtha was greatly 
angry and said:—'Since thou hast, O King, engaged 
another neglecting me, thy body shall remain senseless.' 
Thereupon hearing the curse of Vasishtha, the king got up. 
There beside himself with ire he said—'I was unconscious 
in sleep—still soiled with anger thou hast hurled the fiery 
curse against me like the second rod of Yama. 
Therefore, O ascetic, thy person shall remain senseless for a 
long time.' That king and the ascetic having thus 
imprecated one another under the influence of anger, they 
immediately were deprived of their bodies." 

SECTION LXVI. 
`````````````

Hearing the words of the effulgent Rāma, Lakshmana, 
the slayer of enemies, said with folded hands:—"Having 
thus cast off their bodies how did that Brahman worshipped 
of the celestials and the king regain them?" Having been 
thus accosted by Lakshmana, Rāma, the descendant of 
Ikshwākus and the foremost of men, replied:—"Having 
renounced their persons both Nimi and the pious Vasishtha, 
having asceticism for their wealth, were metamorphosed into 
air. Thereupon being thus deprived of his body the highly 
effulgent and great ascetic Vasishtha went to the Patriarch 
Brahmā with the object of acquiring from him another. 
Being merged in the air, he, conversant with religion, 
bowed unto his father and said:—'O illustrious god of gods! 
O thou lotus-sprung! By the imprecation of Nimi I have 
been now deprived of my body and been converted into 
air. O lord, the state of being bodiless is highly painful 
to all. The bodiless cannot perform any work; do thou, 
therefore, by thy favour, grant me another body.'
Whereto the self-sprung Brahmā, of unmitigated prowess, replied. 
'O great one, do thou enter into the vital energy of Mitra 
and Varuna; and even then, O foremost of twice-born ones, 
thou shalt not be born of a woman and being greatly pious 
shalt attain to the rank of a patriarch.' The Patriarch 
Brahmā having said this, Vasishtha, saluting and 
circumambulating him, repaired to the region of Varuna. 
At that time Mitra in conjunction with Varuna was reigning 
in Varuna's kingdom being worshipped by all celestials. 
Meanwhile encircled by her mates the leading Apsarā arrived 
there at her pleasure. Beholding the frolicsome and 
beautiful Urvasi, Varuna attained to an excess of delight. 
Thereupon he expressed his intention of living with that queen 
of Apsarās, having a moon-like countenance and lotus-eyes. 
Thereat Urvasi, with folded hands, said—'O lord of celestials, 
Mitra himself has already invited me for the same.' Being 
stricken by desire Varuna said to Urvasi 'I shall discharge 
my vital energy into this pot if thou dost not wish to live 
with me.' Hearing those sweet words of the Patriarch 
Varuna, Urvasi was highly pleased and said:—'Do what 
thou hast said. Now my body is under the possession of 
Mitra—but my mind is attached unto thine and thou art 
equally attached unto me.' Urvasi having said this, Varuna 
discharged his vital energy into the pot. Thereupon Urvasi 
approached Mitra. And thereat highly enraged he said to 
her 'I invited thee first; O thou of vicious actions, why hast
thou, renouncing me, secured another. For this vile action, 
thou shalt, by my curse live in the land of mortals for some 
time. The royal saint Puruvarā, the king of Kasi, is the 
son of Budha. Do thou go to him, thou of a vicious 
intellect; he shall be thy husband.' Thereupon being thus 
placed under the influence of curse Urvasi went to Puruvarā, 
The king Puruvarā was the begotten son of Budha. He 
reigned in the foremost of cities Pratishtaro. He begot on 
Urvasi a highly powerful and beautiful son by the name of 
Ayu. Nahusha, powerful as Indra, was the son of Ayu. 
When Indra, the king of the celestials, was assailed with 
thunderbolt by the Asura Vitra, Nahusha governed his kingdom 
for a hundred thousand years. In this wise Urvasi, having 
beautiful teeth, eyes and brow, remained on earth for many 
years and then returned to the region of Indra after the 
period of curse had been over." 

SECTION LXVII. 
``````````````

Hearing this wonderful and heavenly theme Lakshmana
was highly gratified and said to Rāma "O Kākuthstha, 
how did that twice-born one worshipped by the celestials 
and the king regain their bodies, after being bodiless?" 
Hearing the words of Lakshmana, Rāma, having truth for his 
prowess, began to relate the story of Vasishtha. "O foremost 
of Raghus, there sprang up two foremost Brahmin saints, 
from the vital energy discharged by the high-souled Mitra 
and Varuna into the pot. At first therefrom rose up the 
illustrious Rishi Agastya and saying 'I am not thine son' 
went away leaving Mitra. Before the vital energy of
Varuna was thrown into the pot Mitra discharged his own on
Urvasi's account which was the source of Agastya's birth. 
Into the pot in which Mitra's energy was discharged Varuna 
also put his own, and both the energies were mixed up. 
Thereupon after some time from the energies of both Mitra and 
Varuna sprang up the effulgent Vasishtha—the priest of 
Ikshwāku. O gentle one, the highly effulgent Ikshwāku 
appointed that blameless Rishi as the priest of out family as soon as 
he was born. I have thus described to you the story of 
Vasishtha's birth possessing a wonderful body. Hear now 
what befell the king Nimi. And beholding the king Nimi 
bodiless the intelligent Rishi initiated him into the rites 
of sacrifice. And those leading twice-born ones, with 
assembled citizens and servants, began to protect that body 
with unguents, garlands and clothes. Thereupon at the end 
of the sacrifice Vrigu said 'O king, I am propitiated with 
thee; I shall restore thee to senses.' Thereupon the celestials, 
highly pleased, addressed the consciousness of Nimi 
saying 'O royal saint, do thou accept boons; where shall we 
place thy consciousness?' Thereupon being addressed by 
the celestials the consciousness said 'I may live in the eyes 
of the celestials.' They agreed to it and said 'O lord of 
earth, for thee, their eyes shall be influenced within a moment, 
The exhaustion that their eyes shall experience on account 
of thy moving about as the air, shall be removed within this 
moment.' Having said this the celestials repaired to their 
respective quarters and the high-souled Rishis having 
conveyed Nimi’s body to the sacrificial ground and dedicated 
it as an eddy began to churn it with great energy 
accompanied by incantations. They being thus engaged in 
churning the eddy for the purpose of having a son of Nimi 
there sprang up a son of devout austerities. He was called 
Mithi for he originated from *Manthana*; he was called 
Janma for his having sprung up from *Janan* and *Vaideha* 
from having been born from Videha. In this wise Janaka, 
the first king of Videhas, was born. His other name was 
Mithi and his family were celebrated as Maithilas. O 
gentle one, I have thus related unto thee the wondrous births, 
in consequence of the curse, of the great ascetic Vasishtha 
and the royal saint Nimi." 

SECTION LXVIII. 
```````````````

Rāma having said this, Lakshmana, the slayer of 
enemies, burning in his native effulgence, said:—"O 
foremost of kings, this ancient account of the ascetic Vasishtha 
and the king Nimi is highly surprising and wonderful. But 
Nimi is a Kshatriya king and a hero—besides although 
initiated he did not forgive the high-souled Vasishtha." 
Being thus accosted Rāma, the Kshatriya-chief, said to the 
effulgent Lakshmana conversant with all Sastras—"O hero, 
forgiveness is not to be seen in all men. O Sauinitri, do 
thou hear attentively, the unbearable anger which was 
forgiven by the king Yayāti resorting to the quality of 
goodness. Yayāti, the enhancer or the prosperity of cities, was 
the son of Nahusha. He had two beautiful wives, one of 
whom was Sarmishthā, grand daughter of Aditi, the daughter 
of Brishaparva. She was the more beloved of the two; his 
other spouse was Devajāni, grand daughter of Usanas. She 
was not liked by her husband. Both of them gave birth to a 
son each and both the sons were beautiful and attentive. Puru 
was born of Sarmishtha and Yadu of Devajāni. Puru was 
the favourite son of the king, both on account of his mother 
and of his personal graces. Thereat Yadu, greatly sorry, 
said to his mother:—'Born in the race of the illustrious 
Vargava of unwearied actions, thou art going through mental 
afflictions and unbearable insults; therefore, O mother, let us 
both enter into fire. Let the king spend many nights with 
Sarmishthā—the daughter of a demon. Thou mayst withstand 
the insults but I shall never brooke them. Permit me, I shall, 
in sooth, renounce my life.' The son having, weepingly and 
distressingly, said this, Devajāni was greatly enraged and 
thought of her father. As soon as he was thought of 
by his daughter Vargava speedily came there and 
beholding her senseless and deprived from joy said 
'Daughter, what is the matter?' The effulgent 
father having addressed his daughter repeatedly in this 
wise, Devajāni, enraged, replied:—'O foremost of ascetics, 
I shall either enter into fire, water, or drink poison—by no 
means I shall preserve this life of mine. Thou dost not 
know of the miseries and insults I have been subject to. 
Brahman, when a tree is neglected, those who live thereon 
are also distressed. The king having disregarded me, 
forsooth thou hast also been neglected.' Hearing the words 
of his daughter, Vargava, enraged said to the king Yayāti 
'Thou art vicious-minded, O son of Nahusha; thou hast 
dishonored me and therefore in thy youth thou shalt be subject 
to decrepitude and infirmities of age.' Having thus 
imprecated the curse and consoled his sorrowful daughter the 
highly illustrious rishi Vargava repaired to his own habitation. 
Having thus conferred solace unto his daughter, that leading 
Brahman, effulgent as the sun, returned therefrom." 

SECTION LXIX.
`````````````

"Yayāti, the son of Nahusha, was greatly distressed on 
hearing of the ire of the preceptor Sukra. Thereupon 
meeting with the infirmities of age by the imprecation of the 
saint he said to his son Yadu:—'O Yadu, thou art cognizant 
of religion, do thou therefore take this decrepitude for me; 
I shall satisfy myself with various enjoyments. O foremost 
of men, I have not been yet satiated with worldly 
enjoyments—I shall therefore again take upon myself this 
decrepitude after having enjoyed all objects of sense.' Hearing 
those words of Yayāti, the foremost of men, Yadu 
replied:—'Let thy most favourite son Puru take upon himself this 
decrepitude. O king, thou hast deprived me from all 
things—what more, thou dost not allow me to come near thee. 
Let that Puru take this, with whom thou dost eat and live.' 
Hearing the words of Yadu, Yayāti said to Puru:—'O thou 
having large arms, do thou take the decrepitude for me.' 
Hearing the words of Yayāti, Puru, with folded hands, 
said:—'I am always ready to satisfy thy commands; and I have 
been favoured and honored by this command of thine.'
Hearing those words of Puru Yayāti was highly pleased and 
attained to an excess of delight and then transferred his 
own decrepitude to him. Thereupon regaining his youth 
the king reigned in earth for many thousand years 
celebrating thousands of sacrifices. Thereupon after a long time 
Yayāti said to Puru 'O my son, do thou bring the decrepitude 
I have kept as deposit with thee—let it now assail me. I 
transferred it to you as a deposit. For this I shall take it 
back; be not sorry for this. I have been greatly pleased 
that thou hast satisfied my behests. I shall, now pleased, 
install thee on the royal throne.' Having thus addressed 
his son Puru, the king Yayāti angrily said to Yadu, the son 
of Devayani:—'Thou, vicious Rākshasa, art born of me in 
the shape of a Kshatriya, or else why shouldst thou disobey 
my orders? For this thou shalt never be a king. I am thy 
father and preceptor and still thou hast disregarded me. 
Thou shalt be the father of dreadful Rākshasas, O 
vicious minded; thy descendants shall be degraded from the 
lunar race and thy children shall be equally vicious-minded 
like thee.' Having thus imprecated Yadu, the royal saint 
Yayāti honored Puru, the enhancer of the prosperity of the 
kingdom, with installation and then retired to woods. 
Thereupon after a long time he breathed his last and went 
to the abode of the celestials. The highly illustrious Puru 
reigned piously in the foremost of cities Prathishtan. Yadu 
begot thousands and thousands of Rākhasas and being 
degraded from the royal family reigned in a city named 
Kraunchavana, hard to be got at. In this wise, according 
to the custom of the Kshatryas the king Yayāti took upon 
himself the imprecation of the preceptor Sukra, but he did 
not forgive him. I have thus related unto thee everything. 
O gentle one, we shall follow the examples of these illustrious 
men. And in that case we shall not be degraded like the 
king Nriga." While Rāma, having a moon-like countenance, 
was speaking thus, the stars became fewer in the welkin, and 
east, stricken with the early rays of the sun, appeared like 
damsel, clothed in a raiment coloured with the dye of 
flowers. 

SECTION LXX. 
````````````

Thereupon having performed the morning rites the 
lotus-eyed Rāma, in the early morning, sat on his royal throne 
and in the company of Brāhmanas and citizens engaged in 
looking into state affairs. The assembly consisted of the 
priest Vasishtha, the saint Kashyapa, ministers well versed 
in politics, other religious preceptors, moralists, members 
and kings. The assembly of Rāma, of unwearied, actions 
appeared like that of Mahendra, Yama and Varuna. 
Rāma said to Lakshmana, gifted with auspicious marks "O 
Saumitri having long arms, do thou proceed to the 
city-gate to receive those who have come here for business." 
According to Rāma's command Lakshmana, gifted with 
auspicious mark, arrived at the gate and called those who had 
come there for business. But none said that he had been 
brought there by any business. For there was neither 
disease nor poverty in the kingdom. During Rāma's regime
the earth was filled with corns and *Asadhis*. Children 
young men and middle-aged people did not meet with death. 
The earth was governed piously so there was no obstacle. 
Thus during the administration of Rāma none was seen who 
wanted justice. Lakshmana, with folded hands, said to Rāma, 
"None has come for business." Thereat, Rāma, with a 
delighted heart, replied—"Do thou go, O Saumitri, and see 
if any one has come for business. Royal policy if properly 
adopted, impiety can stand nowhere. It is for the fear of the 
king that people protect one another. And although laws, 
instituted by me are protecting the subjects like so many 
arrows, still, O thou having long arms, do thou be engaged in 
governing the subjects." Being thus addressed Lakshmana 
issued out of the house and saw that a dog was waiting at 
the gate. Casting its looks around it was again and again 
barking. Beholding it in that plight the valiant Lakshmana 
said "O generous sir, what business has brought thee 
hither—do thou relate it confidentially." Hearing the words of 
Lakshmana the dog replied—"I wish to relate it unto Rāma, 
of unwearied actions, who is the refuge of all creatures and who 
declares fearlessness unto all." Hearing the words of the dog 
Lakshmana entered the beautiful palace to relate it unto 
Rāma. And having communicated it unto Rāma he issued 
out and said to the dog:—"If thou hast anything true to 
speak thou mayst come and communicate it unto the king." 
Hearing the words of Lakshmana the dog said—"We cannot 
enter into the houses of divinities, kings and Brāhmanas nor 
can we go there where is fire, Indra, the sun or the wind, 
for we are the vilest born; so I cannot enter there. For king 
is the personification of virtue and specially the king Rāma 
is truthful, well versed in the science of fighting and ever 
engaged in the welfare of all beings. He is perfectly 
cognizant of where the six qualities are to be applied—master of 
morality, knoweth all, seeth all and the best of beautiful. He 
is the moon, death, Yama, Kuvera, the giver of riches, fire, 
Indra, the sun and Varuna. O Saumitri, do thou go and 
communicate unto the king protecting his subjects that 
without his permission I do not wish to go there." 
Thereupon the highly effulgent and noble-minded Lakshmana 
entered the palace and said to Rāma:—"O thou having long 
arms, O thou the enhancer of Kausalyā's joy—I have 
communicated thine orders—I shall relate shortly everything 
regarding that; do thou hear. That dog, as a beggar, is 
waiting at the gate for thy commands." Whereto Rāma 
replied:—"Bring him speedily here who is waiting at the 
gate for business." 

SECTION LXXI. 
`````````````

Hearing the words of Rāma the intelligent Lakshmana 
immediately sent for the dog and informed Rāma, who, 
on beholding it, said—"Do thou communicate thy desire 
unto me; be not afraid." Thereupon beholding the king 
Rāma, the dog, having his head cut off, said "The king is 
the protector of animals and their lord. The king is 
awake when the subjects are asleep and he protects them. 
By administering the laws properly the king protects piety. 
Without his shelter the subjects meet with destruction. The 
king is the lord and father of the whole universe. He is 
time, he is Yuga and he is the creation, mobile and immobile. 
He is called *Dharma* because he holdeth all. It is *Dharma* 
(virtue) that upholdeth all mankind. It is by Dharma that 
the three worlds are being preserved. It is *Dharma* or virtue 
that thwarts the enemies. It is virtue that governs the 
subjects duly. It is for this that virtue is called *Dhārana* 
or the holder. The virtue of preservation is the greatest and 
confers fruits in after life. There is nothing like virtue hard 
to acquire in this world. Charity, kindness, honoring the 
pious and innocent conduct constitute the chief virtues; for 
by those the well-being of this life and the next is brought 
about. O Rāghava, O thou of firms vows—thou art an example 
of examples. Thou art cognizant of the conduct of the pious. 
Thou art like an ocean, the refuge of all virtues. O 
foremost of kings, out of ignorance, I have spoken unto thee so 
many things. With my head downwards, I beg for thy 
satisfaction. Be not offended with me." Hearing those wise words 
of the dog, Rāma said—"What shall I do for thee? 
Do thou mention it confidentially." Whereto the dog 
replied, saying:—"It is by piety that a king governs his 
kingdom—it is by virtue that a king protects his subjects, 
becomes a refuge unto all and removes the fear of his men. 
Keeping an eye on this, O Rāma do thou hear, what I say. 
In the house of a certain Brahman there lives a beggar by 
the name of *Sarvarthasiddha* (*i.e.*, who has got all his 
desires satisfied). And although I am innocent, he has for 
nothing hurt me." Hearing those words Rāma sent his 
messenger who brought *Sarvarthasiddha*, master of all 
subjects. Thereupon beholding Rāma in the assembly that 
effulgent and leading twice-born one said:—"O blameless 
Rāma, tell me what I shall do for thee." Whereto Rāma 
said—"O twice-born one, thou hast hurt this dog. What 
offence did it commit by thee that thou didst strike it 
severely with a rod. Anger is an enemy which taketh away 
life. Anger is a sweet-speeched enemy in the garb of a 
friend. It is the foremost of passions and like unto a sharp 
dagger. And it is anger that stealeth away every thing. It 
pilfers all that is acquired by asceticism, sacrifices and gifts. 
It is proper therefore by every means to kill anger. Passions 
are running amock on all sides like so many exceedingly 
wicked steeds. Being satiated with of all objects of 
enjoyments it is better to govern them by patience. By mind, 
actions, words and eyes a man should engage in the well 
being of people. He should not injure any body and be 
not addicted to any thing. The harm, that a mind not 
under control, can accomplish, is beyond the range of a sharp 
dagger, trodden serpent and of an enemy always enraged. 
Even the nature of one, who has learnt humility, cannot be 
trusted. He, who hides his nature, himself reveals his true 
self." Rāma, of unwearied actions, having said this, 
*Sarvarthasiddha*, the foremost of twice-born ones, said:—"Knocking 
about the whole day for alms I was highly enraged and struck 
this dog. It was sitting in the mid-way and I asked 
it again and again to move away. Thereupon, moving away 
and standing with reluctance, it stood fearfully on the 
road-side. O descendant of Raghu, I was at that time stricken 
with hunger, and struck it for its vicious conduct. O king 
of kings, I am guilty in this, and thou must punish me. O lord 
of kings, do thou administer punishment unto me,—I shall 
then be released from the fear of hell." Thereupon, Rāma 
asked all the ministers, saying:—"What is to be done now? 
What punishment is to be inflicted on him? We can protect 
subjects, if we can administer punishment proportionate to 
crime." Thereat, Vrigu, Angiras, Kutsa, Vasishtha, 
Kashya and other ascetics, the leading preachers, the 
ministers, the citizens, and other sages conversant with 
Sastras, present there, said:—"A Brāhmana should not be 
punished with death." The sages conversant with laws 
having said this, the ascetics addressed Rāma, 
saying:—"O Rāghava, a king is the governor of all—specially thyself. 
Thou art the chastiser of the three worlds, the eternal 
Vishnu." They all having said this, the dog began:—"Thou 
didst solemnly say 'What shall I do for thee?' Therefore,
if thou art gratified with me, and if thou dost wish to 
confer boons on me, do thou appoint this Brāhmana as the 
head of family." Thereupon, having been thus honored and 
pleased and ascending an elephant, he proceeded to occupy 
his new dignified station. At this, the councillors of 
Rāma, surprised, said:—"O thou of great effulgence, he has 
not been punished. Rather thou hast conferred on him a 
boon." Hearing the words of ministers, Rāma said:—"You 
do not know the real truth of the whole thing—the dog 
knows it well." Being accosted by Rāma, the dog 
said:—"O Rāghava, I was the head of the family of 
Kālanjava. After the worship of the deities and Brāhmana 
and the feasting of the servants, male, and female, I used to 
take my food. I used to parcel out things duly, and my mind 
was not in the least attached to sin. I used to preserve with 
great care the articles belonging to the tutelary deities, was 
humble, good-natured and engaged in the well-being of all 
animals. Still I have fallen into this dreadful and wretched 
condition. O Rāghava, this Brāhmana is angry by nature, 
and impious, injures others, and is impatient, cruel, harsh in 
words and ignorant, and therefore shall degrade his seven 
generations up and down. He will by no means be able to 
discharge the duties of a head of a family. He, whom thou 
wishest to take to hell with her son, beasts and friends, should 
be engaged in the serving the Brāhmans and kine. For all his 
good actions, he is slain who steals the wealth of a Brāhmana, 
a deity, a woman, and a boy, and the riches given away by him. 
O Rāghava, one who pilfers the riches of a Brāhmana or a deity 
falls into a hell called Vichi. Even he who thinks in 
his mind of stealing it, goes once and again into hell." Hearing 
the words of the dog, the eyes of the effulgent Rāma were 
expanded with surprise. The dog went back from where it 
had come. In its pristine birth the dog was 
high-minded—it is now cursed for being born in a degraded state of 
existence. Thereupon, repairing at last to Vārānasi the dog 
took the vow of fasting. 

SECTION LXXII. 
``````````````

There lived for a long time a vulture and an owl on 
a mountain extending over the banks of a river, resonant 
with the notes of cuckoos and filled with lions, tigers and 
various birds, situated in a pleasant forest abounding in trees 
near the city of Ayodhyā. Once on a time the vicious 
vulture alleging that the nest of the owl was his own, began 
to quarrel with him. O worshipful Sir, thereupon they both 
said:—"The lotus-eyed Rāma is the king of all people; 
let us go to him and he will decide to whom the nest 
belongs." Having thus settled the vulture and the owl, 
being impatient with rage, quarrelling with one another, 
appeared before Rāma and touched his feet. 
Beholding that lord of men, the vulture said: "O preserver of 
humanity, thou art the foremost of celestials and Asuras. 
O thou of great effulgence, thou art gifted with intelligence 
and learning more than Vrihaspati and Sukrachārya. Thou 
art cognisant of the good and bad conditions of creatures. 
In beauty thou art like the Moon and art irrepressible like the 
Sun. In glory thou art like Himalaya, in gravity like the 
Ocean, in prowess like the Patriarch, in patience like the 
Earth, and in velocity like the Wind. O Rāghava, thou art 
the preceptor of the mobile and immobile creation, gifted 
with all sorts of wealth, illustrious, devoid of a revengeful 
spirit, unconquerable, victorious, and master of all Sastras 
and laws. O foremost of men, hear. I have an application 
to thee. O Rāghava, I had built a nest for myself; this 
owl is now occupying it as his own; therefore, O king, do 
thou save me." The vulture having said this, the owl 
began:—"True, it is, O king, that in him are the portions 
of the Moon, Indra, the Sun, Kuvera and Yama, but there 
is in him also a portion of man. But thou art thyself the 
omnipresent deity, Nārāyana. Thou, impelled by thine own 
self, dost judge all creatures impartially; therefore, a 
portion of gentleness is well manifest in thee and therefore 
do people call thee, a portion of the Moon. O patriarch, in 
anger, punishment, gift and fear, thou art our giver, destroyer 
and protector,—it is for this that thou art called Indra. In 
energy thou art like fire irrepressible unto all creatures, and 
because thou dost spread thy lusture upon all creatures, that 
thou art called the Sun. Thou art the very lord of riches 
or art even superior to Kuvera; like Padmā unto the lord of 
riches, Sri is always by thee. Because thou dost discharge 
the functions of Kuvera, thou art the giver of wealth unto 
us. O Rāghava, thou lookest upon all creatures, mobile 
and immobile, with an impartial eye—thou dost regard thy 
friends and foes with impartiality, and thou art duly protecting 
thy subjects. O Rāghava, death pursues him with whom 
thou art offended—and it is for this reason that thou art 
styled by people 'the highly powerful Yama.' O foremost of 
kings, because thou art forgiving unto all creatures and 
a kind king that people sing thy glories as of a man on earth. 
The king is the strength of the weak and helpless and he 
is the eye of the blind and the refuge of those who have no 
shelter. Thou art also our king; therefore do thou listen 
to our petition. O king, entering into my nest, this vulture 
is oppressing me. Thou only, O foremost of men, art the 
divine chastiser of mankind." Hearing those words, Rāma 
sent for his councillors. The ministers of Daçaratha 
and Rāma, Vrishthi, Yayanta, Vijaya, Siddhārtha, 
Rāshtravarddhana, Asoka, Darmapāla the highly powerful  
Sumantra and others were well versed in laws, high-minded,
conversant with all the Sastras, intelligent, born in 
respectable families, and adepts in counsel. Having invited them
all and ascending his Pushpaka car, he went to the place in
question, and, descending there, asked the vulture, "How long
has this nest been made? Tell me, if thou remember
it." Whereto the vulture replied:—"From the time 
mankind were first born and spread over the four quarters
of the globe have I been living in this nest." The owl 
said:—"At the time when the earth was (first) adorned with 
trees that this nest of mine was constructed." Hearing these
words, Rāma said to the councillors:—"That assembly is not 
an assembly where there are no friends—nor are they old
men who do not dwell upon religious topics. That religion
is not a religion where there is no truth 
and that truth is not the truth where there is 
hypocrisy. Those councillors are liars who do not give 
proper replies in time on the subjects they are well-informed 
on. He who does give reply to a question under the 
influence of passion, anger or fear, binds himself with 
a thousand nooses of Varuna, and at the expiration of full 
one year he is released from a single sin." Hearing these 
words, the ministers said to Rāma:—"O thou having a large 
mind, what the owl has said is true—the vulture has not 
spoken the truth. Thou art the evidence this, O great 
king—for the king is the last refuge of all—the root of the 
subject and the eternal religion. He who is punished by 
the king, is not doomed to a degraded state. He is, in 
truth, saved from the fear of hell and reaches a better state." 
Hearing the words of the ministers, Rāma said:—"Hear 
what is mentioned in the Puranas. Formerly the Sun, the 
Moon, the welkin with the stars, the earth with the mountains 
and forests—the three worlds, the mobile and the immobile, 
were under water. At that time only Nārāyana existed as 
the second Sumeru. In Nārāyana's belly was stationed 
the earth with Lakshmi. Having destroyed the 
creation and entered water, the highly effulgent Vishnu, 
identical with the souls of creatures, lay asleep there for 
many long years. Beholding Vishnu asleep after the 
destruction of the universe and knowing Vishnu of 
obstructed breath, the great ascetic Brahmā entered his abdomen. 
Thereupon, when a golden lotus sprang from Vishnu's navel. 
That great lord, ascetic Brahmā, originated therefrom and 
was engaged in austere penances for the purpose of creating 
earth, air, mountains, trees, men, reptiles and all animals 
born from womb or egg. At that time from the ears of 
Nārāyana originated two valiant and dreadful demons under 
the name of Madhu and Kaitabha. Beholding the Patriarch, 
there they were greatly enraged, and pursued him. Thereat, 
the self-born cried aloud hideously. Awakened by that sound, 
Nārāyana engaged in fighting with Madhu and Kaitabha, and 
slew them with his discus. And with their gore the whole 
earth was deluged. Thereupon, purifying the earth again, 
Hari, preserver of the world, covered it with trees. 
And various drugs were also created. And the earth 
was called *Medini* because it was filled with *Medas* 
marrow of Madhu and Kaitabha. It is for this that I hold, 
O ministers, that this house does not belong to the vulture, 
but to the owl. Therefore, this vicious vulture 
should be punished—for this wicked, vicious-minded one, 
robbing another's nest, is oppressing him." In the interval 
a voice was heard in the sky stating the true 
facts:—"O Rāma, do not slay the vulture,—for it has already been 
reduced to ashes by the force of Gautama's asceticism. 
O lord of men, this vulture, in its pristine birth, was a heroic 
truthful and pure king by the name of Brahmadatta. Once 
on a time a Brāhamana, by the name of Gautama, the very 
personification of Kāla, came to the house of Brahmadatta 
for food and said:—'O king, I shall feed in thy 
house for more than a hundred years.' Thereupon, offering 
that effulgent Brāhmana, with his own hands, water to wash 
his feet the king Brahmadatta, made arrangements for his meal. 
Accidentally flesh was mixed with the food of the 
high-souled Gautama. Being enraged thereat, the ascetic 
imprecated him with a dreadful curse and said:—'O king, 
thou become a vulture.' The king said:—'Be propitiated, 
O thou of great vows; do not imprecate me thus. I have, 
out of ignorance committed this offence. O great one, 
O blameless one, do thou act so that this curse 
may find termination.' Thereat understanding that 
this offence was committed by the king unwittingly, the 
ascetic said—'O king, in the race of Ikshwākus a king shall 
be born under the name of Rāma. O foremost of men, thou 
shalt be released from the curse when he shall touch thee.'"
Hearing the voice in the sky, Rāma touched Brahmadatta. 
Thereupon renouncing his vulture from and assuming a 
beautiful body smeared with celestial perfumes, he praised 
Rāma and said:—"O thou conversant with piety, by thy 
Favour have I been saved from the dreadful hell—here hath 
ended my curse." 

SECTION LXXIII.
```````````````

As Rāma and Lakshmana were (daily) engaged in 
conversing thus, the vernal night, neither hot nor cold, came 
on. And it came to pass that one bright morning, after 
having performed his first diurnal rites, Kākutstha, 
understanding the ways of the citizens, became anxious to present 
himself at a spot whence he could observe the citizens. At 
this time Sumantra, entering, addressed him, saying,—"O 
king, stopped at the gate, some ascetics stay 
there,—*Maharshis*, led by Bhārgava and Chyavana. And, O mighty 
monarch, eager for a sight of thee, those dwellers on the 
banks of the Yamunā, well pleased, have despatched me 
(hither), O tiger among men." Hearing his words, the 
righteous Rāma answered: "Let the exalted Dwijas enter." 
Thereat, honoring the royal mandate, the warder with joined 
hands brought those ascetics difficult of being approached. 
And numbering over an hundred, flaming up in their native 
effulgence, those high-souled anchorets entered the royal 
residence. And they presented Rāma with various fruits in 
profusion and vessels filled with sanctified waters 
of all holy spots. Thereupon, accepting the waters of the 
holy places as well as the various kinds of fruit, that 
mighty-armed one spake to the mighty ascetics: "Do ye agreeably 
to desert take these seats." Hearing Rāma's speech, all 
the Maharshis sat down on those graceful and elegant 
golden seats. And seeing the saints seated there, that captor 
of hostile capitals, Rāghava, restraining himself, with joined 
hands, observed: "What is the reason of your visit? What 
shall I needfully perform for you? I am worthy of being 
commanded by the Maharshis; and I must without demur 
compass every pleasure of theirs. And this entire monarchy, 
and the life that is resident in my heart,—all these are for the 
regenerate ones. This I tell you in the name of truth." 
Hearing his words, the sages of fierce austerities inhabiting 
the banks of the Yamunā, broke out into a peal of plaudits. 
And those high-souled ones, exceedingly rejoiced, said: "On 
earth, O crown of men, this can only be expected from thee 
and nobody else. Many kings wielding great power have 
passed away who, having regard to the (possible) gravity 
of the undertaking, could not bring themselves to promise 
anything beforehand. But, without knowing he task, thou 
hast bound thyself by a promise for the glory of the Brāhmanas. 
And thou, without doubt, wilt succeed in effecting the work; 
and it behoveth thee to deliver the sages from a mighty 
fright." 

SECTION LXXXV. 
``````````````

When the sages had spoken thus, Kakutstha said: "O 
ascetics, tell me what is the work which I shall have to 
accomplish in your behalf. Your fear shall be removed." As 
Kākutstha was speaking thus, Bhargava remarked: "O lord 
of men, do thou hear of the origin of the fear that threatens 
our country. O king, formerly in the Krita age, there was 
a magnanimous offspring of Diti, the mighty Asura, Madu, 
eldest son of Lotā. He was well disposed towards 
Brāhmanas, kind to those seeking his refuge, and gifted with 
high intelligence. The exceedingly generous deities delighted 
in him greatly. And by way of honoring him, Rudra 
conferred a wonderful boon upon Madhu endowed with prowess 
and ever intent on religion. And extracting a dart from
his own, possessed of terrific energy, endowed with great 
force, and furnished with exceeding splendour, that high-souled 
one, well pleased, made it over (to Madhu) and spoke to him. 
Thou hast practised excellent and unrivalled righteousness, 
which hath won my good graces, and (therefore), I, highly 
gratified, bestow on thee this choice weapon. So long as 
thou, O mighty Asura, dost not assail celestials and Vipras, 
so long shall this be thine,—otherwise it shall come to naught.
Reducing to cinders the person that shall rashly enter upon 
conflict with thee, this dart shall return to thy hand." Having 
thus obtained the boon from Rudra, the mighty Asura, again 
bowing to Mahādeva, addressed him, saying: "O reverend 
one, may this excellent dart be the possession of my family. 
O god, thou art the lord of the immortals.' Thereat the lord 
of all beings, the mighty deity Siva, answered Madhu, when 
he had spoken thus: 'This will not be. But in order 
that thy prayer may not go for nothing, I graciously say in
thy behalf that one of thy sons shall sway this dart. So 
long that dart-handed one shall be incapable of being 
destroyed by any creature.’ Having obtained this 
wonderful boon from the god, Madhu—foremost of 
Asuras—caused a splendid city to be constructed. His beloved wife 
the exalted and majestic Kumbhinasi is the offspring of 
Viçwavasu by Analā. Her son, the highly powerful wicked, 
and fierce Lavana, ever since his boyhood, gave himself up to 
a sinful course of life. Seeing his son, committed to an 
impious course Madhu was overcome with grief, but he did 
not say anything to him. And forsaking this world, he 
entered the region of Varuna; and making over the dart 
unto Lavana, communicated to him all about the boon he 
had obtained. And by virtue of the power of the dart, he 
oppresseth the three worlds in especial the ascetics; such is 
the power of Lavana, and such is his dart. Hearing all this 
O Kākutstha, thou art capable (of righting our wrong.) 
Thou art our chief resource. O Rāma many a monarch hath 
been already sued by the sages, O hero, to deliver them from 
this fear,—but we have not yet found a deliverer. Hearing, 
O child, that Rāvana together with all his forces and vehicles 
hath been destroyed (by thee), we know that there breathes 
not another king on earth capable of delivering us. 
Therefore our prayer is that thou mayst deliver us afflicted 
with the fear of Lavana. Thus, O Rāma, have we acquainted 
thee with the occasion of fear that hath arisen. Thou art 
capable of coping with the same. Do thou of undeteriorated 
prowess, do the needful." 

SECTION LXXVI. 
``````````````

Thus accosted (by the sages), Rāma answered them 
with joined hands: "What doth he live on? What are 
his ways? And where doth Lavana live?" Hearing 
Rāghava's words, the sages informed him of the way in 
which Lavana increased in power. "His food is every creature 
specially ascetics; his manner of life is regulated by ferocity 
and his constant home is Madhuvana. Slaying constantly 
thousands on thousands of lions and tigers and deer, and 
birds and human beings, he provides his daily food (with 
their flesh.) And like the Destroyer on the occasion of the 
universal dissolution, that one possessed of gigantic strength 
feeds on other creatures as well." Hearing this, Rāghava 
spoke to the mighty ascetics: "I will slay that Raksha. Let 
your fright depart." Having thus bound himself with that 
promise to the ascetics of fierce energy, Raghu's son along 
with his brothers spoke: "What hero shall slay Lavana? Do 
you decide this. On whom shall devolve this duty? Whether 
the mighty armed Bharata or the intelligent Satrughna shall
(do this work?)" Thus addressed by Rāghava Bharata 
remarked: "I will slay this. Let this task be entrusted to 
me." Hearing Bharata's speech instinct with fortitude and 
valor, the younger brother of Lakshmana stood up, leaving 
his golden seat. And Satrughna, saluting the king 
represented: "The mighty-armed second son of Raghu 
hath already achieved a grand work: he formerly 
governed Ayodhyā empty of the noble one, [#]_ bearing 
in his heart the grief connected with his return. 
Undergoing many a hardship, king, that illustrious one 
passed his days, lying down on a bed of sorrow, and living 
on fruits and roots, and wearing rags. Having suffered such 
misery, Raghu's son should not be suffered to undergo 
trouble, while, O king I his servant is by." On Satrughna 
saying this, Rāghava again said: "Let this be so. Do thou 
do my bidding. I shall install thee on the graceful city of 
Madhu; or if thou wish without and entrust Bharata with 
this task, O long-armed one. Heroic, and accomplished, thou 
art competent to found a city on the Yamunā as well as 
flourishing provinces. He that, having people's 
dominion, doth not furnish it with a king, goeth to hell. So 
if thou accept my words, then slaying Madhu's son, the 
sinful Lavana, rule the kingdom righteously. O hero, thou must 
say anything after what I have spoken. Without doubt, a
youthful younger brother must obey the injunctions of his
elder brother. Do thou, O Kākutstha, accept the installation
which I confer on thee, preluded by the prescribed religious
formulae uttered by Vipras headed by Vasishtha."

.. [#] Rāma. 

SECTION LXXVII. 
```````````````

Thus accosted by Rāma, the exceedingly energetic 
Satrughna was powerfully wrought up with bashfulness, and replied 
slowly: "O lord of men, this doth not appear to be in
consonance with morality. Wherefore, an elder brother 
existing, wouldst thou install a younger one? I must, O
best of men, do thy behest; for, O exalted one, thy mandate 
can never be passed by me. O hero, I have heard from thee 
as well as from the Sruti (touching the morality concerned). [#]_ 
When my second brother had already vowed (that he would 
slay Lavana), I ought not to have returned the answer I 
actually have. I saying,—‘I will in battle slay the dreadful 
Lavana,’ I have been guilty of an unrighteous speech. And 
it is for this transgression that, O powerful one, I shall have 
to undergo this improper process. But, albeit this course 
is unrighteous and entails perdition, yet desired by my eldest 
brother, I certainly ought not to make any answer. And, O 
Kākutstha, a second answer I would not return; so that, 
O bestower of honor, I may not, by a second reply, render 
myself liable to a fresh punishment. In this matter, O chief 
of men, I will even do thy desire. Do thou, O descendant 
of Raghu, so order that sin may not be mine (in having 
obeyed thy mandate.)" Thus addressed by the heroic and 
high-souled Satrughna, Rāma, delighted, spoke unto Bharata 
and Lakshmana,—"Do you carefully provide the things 
necessary for the coronation: this very day shall I install 
that foremost of men, the descendant of Raghu. And by 
my order do you summon the Purodhasas, O Kākutstha, 
and the citizens and the Ritwijas, and the councillors." 
Having received the royal behest, the mighty car-warriors 
did accordingly. And the Kshatriyas and the Brāhmanas 
entered the royal mansion with the priest as well as the 
requisite things for the installation. And then commenced 
the auspicious sprinkling of the high-souled Satrughna, 
gladdening (the hearts of all in) the palace of Rāghava. And 
on being installed Kākutstha resembled the Sun; and he 
like Skanda formerly installed by the celestials led by Indra. 
And when Satrughna had been installed by Rāma of untiring 
deeds, the citizens as well as the Brāhmanas of vast Vedic 
attainments experienced excess of joy. And Kausalyā 
and Sumitra and Kaikeyi and the other wives of the king 
set up festal salutation in the palace. And on Satrughna 
having been installed the high-souled sages dwelling 
on the banks of the Jamunā, thought that Lavana had been 
slain. Then placing the installed Satrughna on his lap, 
Rāghava, extolling his prowess, addressed him sweet words: 
"O captor of hostile capitals, this divine arrow never missing 
is thine. With this, O son of Raghu, thou, O placid one, 
wilt slay Lavana. O Kākutstha, this shaft was forged when 
invisible by celestials and Asuras the divine self-sprung 
and invincible (deity) reposed on the mighty main, and 
when creation was oppressed by Madhu and Kaitabha as 
well as other Rākshasas. He, overwhelmed with rage 
desirous of creating the three worlds, created this best of arrows 
invincible to all beings, for the destruction of the wicked 
ones; and destroyed them in battle by means of this very 
arrow. And having with this foremost of shafts finished 
Madhu and Kaitabha, they set about creating the worlds. 
When, O Satrughna, formerly I sought to slay Rāvana, I 
did not discharge this arrow, thinking that if discharged, it 
would inflict great havoc on creatures. Keeping in his abode 
that great and redoubted which had been bestowed on Madhu 
by the high-souled Tryamvaka, for the destruction of 
foes,—and worshipping the same ever, Lavana goeth about and 
secureth excellent fare (for himself) when one challenged 
him, desirous of reducing him (his antagonist) to ashes. 
Therefore, O foremost of men, thou shouldst, before entering 
the city, stand at the gate obstructing his course. O thou
having long arms, thou shouldst invite him for battle when
he shall be weaponless and in that way wouldst be able 
to destroy him. And by no other means he is to be slain.
If thou canst encompass this, he shall forsooth be slain. O
my son, I have thus told thee the way in which the dart 
should be thwarted. It is impossible to surpass the prowess 
of the graceful Nilkantha."

.. [#] *i.e.* of being installed as a king during the life of my elder brother. 

SECTION LIXVIII. 
````````````````

Having thus addressed Satrughna, Rāma again and 
again praised him and said:—"O foremost of men, let four 
thousand horses, two thousand chariots, one hundred excellent 
elephants, shops with various articles and songsters follow 
thee. O foremost of men, O Satrughna, do thou proceed 
with *Nijuta* gold and silver coins and necessary riches and 
conveyances. Do thou so act, O hero, that soldiers might 
be well-fed and delighted and be not annoyed with thee. 
Do thou please them with sweet words, for the servants, 
when they face enemies, have not with them friends or 
wives—and so they are pleased, O Rāghava when they receive 
sufficient food and presents, O Satrughna, having sent 
before a huge and well contented army do thou proceed 
afterwards to *Madhuvana*. Thou shouldst proceed so 
fearlessly that Madhu’s son Lavana might not know that thou 
wert going for encounter. O foremost of men, he shall not 
be slain by any other expedient than that I have acquainted 
thyself with. If he can perceive before, whoever that enemy 
might be, Lavana shall forsooth destroy him. When rains
shall set in after the expiration of the present summer thou 
shouldst slay him for that is the proper time for destroying 
that vicious-minded one. For he shall then fearlessly 
move about leaving off his dart understanding that no one 
would come to fight with him during rains. Let the soldiers 
only now proceed with ascetics before them; the summer 
hath not as yet fully expired and this is the time, when they 
shall, without any trouble, be able to cross the Ganges.
Afterwards having encamped thy army on the other side of
the Ganges thou shouldst alone proceed speedily with thy 
bow." Hearing those words of Rāma and summoning 
his highly powerful and leading warriors Satrughna said 
"Do ye all proceed and halt at those places which are well 
known to you. Do not oppress any body." Having thus 
ordered the powerful warriors the highly powerful Satrughna
bowed unto Kauçalyā, Sumitrā and Kaikeyi. Thereupon 
having circumambulated with folded hands Rāma, 
Lakshmana and Bharata he reverentially saluted the feet of the
priests. And then with Rāma's permission and having gone 
round him the highly powerful Satrughna issued out. Having 
thus depatched before a huge army consisting of selected 
elephants and horses, Satrughna, the enhancer of the glory
of Raghu's race, took farewell from Rāma. And all showed
him proper respect. 

SECTION LXXVIII. 
````````````````

Having thus despatched his army and waited at 
Ayodhyā for a month Satrughna, the slayer of enemies, 
proceeded alone. Having spent two nights on his way he 
arrived at the holy and picturesque hermitage of the great 
ascetic Valmiki. And having bowed unto that high-souled 
Muni he, with folded palms, said:—"O illustrious Sir, I wish 
to wait here this day; I have come here for some business 
of our master Rāma. To-morrow morning I shall proceed 
to the dreadful West." Hearing the words of the 
high-souled Satrughna, Vālmiki, the foremost of ascetics, replied 
saying:—"O thou of great renown, do thou wait here 
without any hesitation. O gentle one, this hermitage belongs 
to the descendants of the Raghu race. Do thou fearlessly 
take thy seat and water to wash thy feet." Thereupon taking 
water to wash his feet and feeding upon fruits and roots 
Satrughna attained to great delight. And afterwards he asked the 
great ascetic Vālmiki saying:—"O great ascetic, to whom 
belong the articles of sacrifice in the cast near this 
hermitage?" Whereto Vālmiki replied "Satrughna, hear I shall 
tell thee, whose sacrificial ground was this in the days of 
yore. There was a king by the name of Saudāsa—one of 
thy ancestors. His son Virjashaha was a highly powerful and 
pious king. The heroic Saudāsa was fond of hunting from 
his boyhood. Once on a time while a-hunting, he espied 
two Rakshasas in the forest. He had heard about them 
many times before; they were in the shape of tigers and of 
a dreadful figure and were not satiated with devouring 
many thousand deer. King Saudāsa saw those two 
Rākshasas and found the forest divested of all creatures. 
And enraged in consequence thereof he slew one of them. 
Having slain him and been at ease, Saudāsa, the foremost 
of men, began to eye that Rākshasa. His mate, greatly 
aggrieved, said to him:—'O vicious one, thou hast, without 
any fault, slain my companion—I shall therefore mete out 
becoming punishment unto thee.' Having said this the 
Rākshasa vanished therefrom. Thereupon in time the prince 
Virjashaha became king. Saudāsa engaged in celebrating 
a mighty horse-sacrifice in the vicinity of this hermitage. 
Vasishtha officiated as a priest at that sacrifice. It continued 
for many Ayuta years. For immense riches the sacrifice 
appeared like one performed by the celestials. Thereupon 
when the sacrifice was about to be finished the aforesaid 
Rākshasa, remembering his former enmity, assumed the shape 
of Vasishtha and said to the king Saudāsa:—'O king, to-day 
the sacrifice shall end; do therefore, without any delay, 
feed me with meat.' Hearing the words of the Rākshasa in 
the guise of a Brahman, the king ordered his expert cooks, 
saying:—'Do ye soon prepare such dishes of meat as may 
satisfy my preceptor Vasishtha.' Having been ordered by 
the king the cooks reverentially went away and the Rākshasa 
assuming their shape brought before the king dishes. The 
king and queen offered those dishes unto the ascetic 
Vasishtha, who, after being treated to them, perceived that 
they were of human flesh and, terribly enraged, said:—'O 
king, let this be thy food which thou hast offered me; this 
shall not prove otherwise.' Being enraged on hearing it 
the king Saudāsa took water in his palms and was about 
to imprecate Vasishtha, when his queen, preventing him 
said:—'O king, the illustrious great ascetic Vasishtha is 
our preceptor and priest and so thou shouldst not imprecate 
him.' Hearing those words of his queen, the king Saudāsa, 
threw off that powerful water on his own feet which at once 
became dark. From that time the illustrious king Saudāsa 
became also known by the name of Kalasmpāda. 
Thereupon the king with his spouse again and again bowed unto 
Vasishtha’s feet and informed him of what the Rākshasa 
had done under the guise of a Brāhmana. Hearing the 
words of the king and being apprised that this vile act had 
been done by the Rākshasa, Vasishtha said, 'O king, even 
what I have said angrily shall not prove futile. However 
I confer upon thee this boon that after twelve years thou 
shalt be freed from this curse, and by my favour thou shalt 
cherish no recollection of thy condition extending over those 
twelve years.' Having thus suffered the consequences of 
the curse, Saudāsa, the slayer of enemies, again obtained his 
kingdom and governed his subjects. O descendant of 
Rāghu, the sacrificial ground of which thou hast asked me, 
belongs to the king Saudasa." Having thus heard the 
dreadful story of the king Saudāsa and saluted the ascetic 
Vālmiki, Satrughna entered a thatched cottage. 

SECTION LXXIX. 
``````````````

On the same night Satrughna housed himself in a 
thatched cottage Sitā gave birth to twin sons. In the midnight 
the Muni boys came to Vālmiki and communicated unto him 
this auspicious intelligence, saying "O illustrious Sir, the 
beloved spouse of Rāma hath given birth to two sons; do 
thou so protect them that evil spirits might not injure them." 
Hearing those words the highly effulgent Vālmiki went there 
and attained to great delight on beholding those two highly 
effulgent sons, resembling the newly risen sun and the 
celestials. Thereupon he made arrangements against the 
oppression of ghosts and goblins. Thereupon taking Kusa (the 
upper part of the grass) and Lava (the lower part) the great 
ascetic Vālmiki made those arrangements. And giving 
Kusa sanctified by Mantras unto the hands of elderly women 
he said, "Do ye rub the person of the elder boy with these," 
and giving them Lava he said "Do ye rub the person of the 
younger brother with this. And according to this I shall 
name the first Son Kusa and the second Lava; and by those 
names they shall be celebrated on earth." Thereupon 
reverentially taking from the hands of Vālmiki and Kusa Lava, the 
means of protection, the elderly ladies engaged in guarding 
them. Hearing that Sitā without any trouble had given birth 
to two sons and elderly female ascetics had been engaged in 
protecting them and hearing the chanting of Rāma's glories in 
the midnight, Satrughna thought within himself. "Blessed it
is that Sitā hath given birth to two sons." And with this joy 
the live long night of Srābana passed away in no time. 
Having performed the morning rites after the expiration of 
the night and taken farewell from the ascetic Vālmiki, 
Lakshmana proceeded towards the west. And having spent 
seven nights he at last arrived at the hermitage of the pious 
Rishis living on the banks of the Yamunā. Taking 
shelter there he engaged in pleasant conversation with 
Chābanya and other ascetics. Having remained there for 
the night and talked with those ascetics the high-souled, 
heroic Raghu prince Satrughna was greatly delighted. 

SECTION LXXX. 
`````````````

Thereupon when the night set in Satrughna accosted 
Vrigu’s son Chābanya saying, "O Brahman, how powerful is 
Lavana? And what is the strength of his dart? What 
persons before had been destroyed by this dart in conflict?" 
Hearing the words of the high-souled descendant of 
Raghu,—Satrughna, the highly effulgent Chābanya replied 
saying.—"O descendant of Raghu, Lavana hath accomplished many 
works by this dart; amongst them, hear what Māndhāta, 
born in the race of Ikshwāku, did. The early king of Ayodhyā 
was known over the three worlds under the name of 
Māndhāta. He was the son of Yavanāshwa, highly powerful and 
strong. Having brought the whole world under his 
subjection the king Māndhāta engaged in the conquest of the 
celestial region. He having been engaged in making 
preparations to conquer the world of gods—the celestial chief 
Indra with other immortals was greatly terrified. With this 
promise, the king Māndhāta went up into the celestial region 
that he would occupy the half of Indra’s throne and kingdom 
and the celestials would adore him. Being apprised of this 
vicious intention of his, Indra, the slayer of Paka, consoled 
him in sweet words, saying;—'O foremost of men, even 
in the land of men, thou hast not been able to become the 
real king. Without perfectly subjugating the earth how 
dost thou wish to lord over the celestial kingdom? If the 
whole world is under thy subjection, O hero, be thou, with 
the whole host of thy servants and soldiers, installed on the 
celestial throne.' Indra having said this, the high-souled 
Māndhāta replied:—'O Sakra, who on this earth, hath 
disobeyed my commands?' Whereto Indra replied 'O sinless 
one, the night-ranger, Lavana, Madhu's son, living in 
Madhuvana, is not under thy control.' Hearing those dreadful and 
unpleasant words from Indra, the king lowered his head in 
shame and became silent. Thereupon, having welcomed 
Indra in that way, he left there and returned to earth. O slayer 
of enemies, with an angry heart, army and conveyance he 
went to subjugate Madhu's son Lavana and sent an emissary 
inviting him to battle. The ambassador, having gone there, 
addressed many unpleasant words unto Lavana and the 
night-ranger devoured him. On the other hand finding the delay of 
his return the king Māndhāta, enraged, began to assail the 
Rākshasa Lavana with arrows from all sides. Laughing wildly 
Lavana took up the dart in his hand and discharged it to 
destroy the king with his followers. Thereupon growing 
powerful the dart reduced the king with his servants and army 
into ashes and returned to Lavana. In this wise the 
high-souled king Māndhāta, with his huge army, was slain. O 
gentle hero, incomparable and great is the strength of the 
dart. Forsooth thou shalt slay Lavana next morning. Certain 
is thy victory if Lavana cannot take up his dart. People 
shall be at ease if thou canst bring about the destruction of 
Lavana. O foremost of men, I shall then describe unto
thee the incomparable and dreadful prowess of the 
vicious-souled Lavana and his dart. O king, with great exertions 
did Lavana slay Māndhāta and not easily. O high-minded 
one, next morning thou shalt surely destroy Lavana. He 
shall issue out for flesh without taking his dart. And at that
time, O lord of men, thou shalt, for sooth, be crowned will 
victory." 

SECTION LXXXI.
``````````````

They being thus engaged in conversation regarding his 
achieving victory without any danger Satrughna in no time 
passed the night. The clear morning having arrived, the 
heroic Lavana issued out of his city to collect food. In the 
meantime having crossed the river Yamunā, the heroic 
Satrughna, with bow in his hands, stood at the gate of 
Madhu’s city. Thereupon returning in the noon with many 
thousand animals, the night-ranger Lavana, of dreadful 
actions, espied Satrughna standing at the gate with a weapon 
in his hand. Thereupon he said:—"What shall thou do with 
this weapon? O vile wight, enraged I have devoured many 
thousand persons holding weapons like thee. I now perceive 
thou hast also been possessed by Kāla. O vile man, I am 
fully fed. How shall thou, of thy own accord, enter into my 
mouth?" Lavana having said this again and again laughing 
the great hero Satrughna shed tears in anger. The 
high-minded Satrughna being beside himself with rage, from all 
his person issued burning lustre. Greatly enraged he said 
to the night-ranger "O thou of a vicious intellect, I wish to 
enter into a duel encounter with thee. I am the son of the 
great king Daçaratha, brother of the intelligent Rāma and my 
name is Satrughna. I slay all my enemies and have come here 
to destroy thee. I wish now to fight with thee—do thou enter 
into a duel conflict. Thou art the enemy of all animals. 
Thou shall not be able to survive at my hands." He having 
said this, the Rākshasa, laughing aloud, replied unto that 
foremost of men;—"Thy understanding is bewildered. 
By the influence of destiny thou hast come under my control. 
The Rākshasa Rāvana was the brother of my aunts, o thou
of vicious understanding, O vile wight, it is for his wife 
that Rāma did slay him. It is out of hatred that I have 
tolerated the destruction of Rāvana's family and have 
pardoned you all. You are all vile men; I have slain and 
defeated all of your family that have passed away and shall 
destroy all that are living and shall come into existence. 
O thou of vicious intellect, if thou wishest I shall fight with 
thee. Do thou wait here so long I do not bring my 
weapon. Do thou remain here as long as I with that 
shall not kill thee." Whereto Satrughna immediately 
replied "Where shalt thou go while I am alive? The 
practical men should never let off the enemies who come 
out of their own accord. He, who inviteth an enemy into 
battle under the influence of perverted understanding is
slain like a coward. Do thou behold this world of creatures
to thy hearts' content for I shall by various sharp weapons 
despatch thee to Yama's abode who is the enemy of the three 
worlds and Rāghava." 

SECTION LXXXII.
```````````````

Hearing the words of the high-souled Satrughna 
Lavana was greatly enraged and again and again asked him
to wait. And clashing his hands and grinding his teeth he 
invited that foremost of Raghus, Satrughna, to fight. And 
Satrughna, the slayer of celestial's enemies, said to the 
dreadful Lavana, giving vent to those words:—"Satrughna 
was not born when thou didst defeat other kings; do thou 
therefore proceed to Death's abode being assailed by shafts. 
O thou of a vicious soul, as did the celestials behold Rāvana 
slain so shall the Rishis and learned Brahmans behold thee, 
destroyed by me. O Rākshasa, forsooth shall good crown 
cities and villages when thou shalt fall down burnt by my 
arrows. As the rays of the sun enter into lotus so shall 
arrows, hard as lightning, discharged by my hands, shall 
enter into thy heart." Being beside himself with ire on 
hearing those words of Satrughna, Lavana threw a huge tree 
against his breast. And Satrughna too sundered it into a 
hundred pieces. Beholding his own action baffled the 
Rākshasa again took up many trees and hurled them at 
Satrughna, who, with three or four hundred bent arrows, cut 
them all, one by one, into pieces. Thereupon when the 
powerful Satrughna assailed him with arrows the Rākshasa 
was not the least pained. Rather laughing aloud the valiant 
Rākshasa uprooted a tree and struck him with that on the 
head. With that stroke he was wounded and slain. And 
that hero falling there arose a terrible uproar amongst the 
Rishis, celestials, Gandharvas and Apsarās. Thereupon 
considering Satrughna slain the night-ranger did not enter 
his house albeit he got the opportunity; and moreover 
beholding him fallen and destroyed he did not take up his dart. 
He then began to carry his collected food. Regaining his 
sense within a moment, Satrughna, with a weapon in his hand, 
stood at the city gate and the Rishis began to praise him. 
Thereupon, he having taken up an excellent arrow of 
unfailing aim the ten quarters were filled with its native brilliance. 
Its face was like lightning and its velocity the same and it 
looked like Meru and Mandara; its joints were all bent. 
None could defeat it in battle. It was pasted with red 
sandal resembling blood and its feathers were beautiful. 
Beholding that dart like unto the fire of dissolution, and 
dreadful like unto the lords of Dānavas, mountains and Asuras, 
the creatures were greatly terrified. What more, being 
disturbed, the celestials, Asuras, Gandharvas, saints and 
Apsarās and all other creatures of the world approached the 
Great Patriarch, the conferrer of boons and said;—"The 
fear of the celestials and the destruction of the creatures 
hath arrived." Hearing those words the Patriarch Brahma 
replied "Although it is a source of great fear still it is not 
dreadful unto the celestials." Thereupon with sweet accents 
he said:—"Hear, O ye celestials, Satrughna hath taken up 
this arrow for the destruction of Lavana. By the energy 
thereof we have all been overwhelmed. This effulgent, 
ever-existing arrow was made by the Primeval Deity 
Vishnu—the lord of creatures. My children, the burning arrow, of 
which you are afraid, was made by the high-minded Vishnu 
for slaying the demons Madhu and Kaitabha. And Vishnu 
alone is cognizant of its energy. This Satrughna is the first 
portion of Vishnu’s person; do ye all go hence and behold the 
destruction of the foremost Rākshasa, Lavana, by the 
high-souled, heroic Satrughna, the younger brother of Rāma." 
Hearing the words of the Patriarch Brahmā, the celestials 
arrived at the battle-field of Satrughna and Lavana and saw 
that the arrow, held by Satrughna’s hands, was burning like 
the fire of dissolution. Beholding the welkin covered by the 
celestials, Satrughna, the descendant of Raghu, emitting 
leonine roars, again and again looked towards Lavana. And 
being again excited by the high-souled Satrughna and 
enraged Lavana arrived for encounter. Thereupon expanding 
his bow up to ears, Satrughna, the most accomplished 
archer, discharged his arrow against the spacious breast 
of Lavana. And piercing his heart that arrow entered 
speedily into Rasātala And having entered Rasātala that 
arrow, honored by the celestials, again came to the descendant 
of Raghu. And being pierced by that shaft the 
night-ranger Lavana fell down on earth like a mountain clapped 
by a thunder-bolt. The Rākshasa being slain that celestial, 
huge arrow came into the possession of Rudra before the 
gods. Having removed the fear of the three worlds with 
one shaft, that heroic Raghu, Satrughna—younger brother 
of Lakshmana, holding excellent bow and arrow, appeared 
like the Sun of thousand rays removing darkness. 
Thereupon chanting the glories of Satrughna, the celestials, Rishis, 
Pannagas, Apsarās, said "O son of Daçaratha, it is really 
fortunate, that thou, renouncing fear, hast acquired victory 
and that the Rākshasa Lavana hath been vanquished like a 
serpent." 

SECTION LXXXIII. 
````````````````


Lavana being slain the celestials headed by Agni and 
Indra said in sweet accents to Satrughna the represser of 
enemies:—"O child, fortunate it is that thou hast been 
crowned with success after slaying the Rākshasa Lavana. 
Do thou, therefore, O foremost of men, O thou of firm vows, 
accept boons. O thou having long arms, all those who can 
confer boons have arrived here; they all wish for thy 
victory; seeing us doth not go without fruits." Hearing the 
words of the celestials the large-armed and self-controlled 
Satrughna placed his hands on his head and said.—"Let 
this picturesque and charming city of Madhu, built by the 
celestials, be my capital; this is the only excellent boon I 
can beg." The celestials, with a delighted heart, said to the 
descendant of Raghu:—"Thy desire shall be fulfilled and 
forsooth shall thy city be turned into a picturesque capital under 
the name of Surashena." The high-souled celestials having 
ascended the welkin saying this, the highly effulgent 
Satrughna brought the soldiers there, that were encamped 
on the banks of the Ganges. When the soldiers arrived there 
on hearing the commands of Satrughna he engaged in 
making encampments in the month of Srāban. In this wise 
the fearlessness of the celestial host, taking the shape of a 
country, that beautiful and picturesque city was reared in 
the course of twelve years. All the fields there were filled 
with crops and Indra began to pour showers in due season. 
And being protected by the strength of Satrughna's arms 
all men there became valiant and were freed from diseases. 
That city on the banks of Yamunā appeared beautiful like 
the half moon and was filled with yards, shops, streets 
beautiful houses, men of four orders and various articles of 
trade. Satrughna now engaged in beautifying the spacious, 
white houses that were made by Lavana before, with various 
ornamental works. Beholding the city interspersed with various 
excellent gardens, pleasure grounds and prosperously filled 
with celestials and men and diverse articles of trade and 
merchants hailing from various countries, Satrughna, the younger 
brother of Bharata, attained to the satisfaction of desire and 
excess of delight. Having thus reared the beautiful city 
he resolved within himself "The twelfth year has come. I 
shall now behold the feet of Rāma." Thereupon having set 
up the city resembling the region of the celestials and filled 
with various men, the king Satrughna, the enhancer of 
Raghu's race, determined on beholding Rāma's feet. 

SECTION LXXXIV. 
```````````````

Thereupon on the completion of the twelfth year, 
Satrughna, with few servants, soldiers and followers, desired 
to proceed to Ayodhyā protected by Rāma. Having 
prevented his minister and leading generals he proceeded with one 
hundred chariots and cavalry. And having counted seven 
halting stations on his way, the highly illustrious descendant of 
Raghu—Satrughna, arrived at the hermitage of Vālmiki. And 
having bowed unto the feet of the leading Muni, that foremost 
of men took from his hands water to wash feet and *Arghya* 
and accepted his hospitality. The great ascetic Vālmiki 
addressed to the high-souled Satrughna many sweet words. 
Having referred at first to Lavana's destruction, he 
said:—"Having slain Lavana thou hast performed a very hard work. 
O gentle one, O foremost of men, Lavana had slain in conflict 
many hundred highly powerful kings with their army and 
conveyances. And thou hast easily slain that vicious-souled 
Rākshasa, Lavana. By thy prowess the whole world hath 
been divested of fear. With great difficulty Rāma had slain 
Rāvana—but without any trouble whatsoever thou hast 
accomplished this mighty work. Lavana being slain, the celestials 
have been greatly delighted—what more the well-being of 
the whole universe and all creatures has been brought about. 
O Rāghava, O foremost of men, being present in the assemblage 
of Vasava—I duly witnessed your combat. O Satrughna, 
I too have been greatly delighted—I therefore smell thy crown 
for this is the best expression of love." Saying this the 
high-minded Vālmiki smelled his crown and made arrangements for 
his reception as well as that of his followers. After meals, 
Satrughna, the foremost of men, listened to themes 
relating to Rāma and set in musical notes. Those themes 
were composed describing the early actions of Rāma. 
They were composed in Sanskrit, set to the tune of a 
musical instrument, adorned with all the marks of vocal music 
and arranged in accompaniment with notes. Satrughna, the 
foremost of men, heard them from the beginning to the end, 
pregnant with truth and composed of those words. And 
on hearing it he was beside himself with joy and his eyes 
were full of tears. And remaining stunned for some time 
and regaining his sense afterwards he began to breathe hard 
out of excess of surprise. He heard, in that song, of past 
events as things passing on. And hearing it, his followers, 
with their heads down and sorrowfully said:—"Wonder," and 
saying this they began to converse with one 
another:—"Alas! Where are we? Is this a dream? We have been 
hearing at this hermitage what we had not seen before. What 
wonder, that in a dream we hear such an excellent song." 
Being in this wise greatly surprised they said to 
Satrughna:—"O foremost of men, do thou ask particularly, about this, 
Vālmiki, the foremost of ascetics." They being all thus
struck with curiosity, Satrughna said:—"It is not proper for 
us, O Ye soldiers, to question him in this way. There are many
such wonders in the hermitage of this ascetic. It is not 
therefore becoming to ask him about this out of curiosity." 
Having thus addressed the soldiers and bowed unto the 
ascetic, Satrughna, the desendant of Raghu, entered his own
quarter. 

SECTION LXXXV. 
``````````````

Thereupon going to bed, Satrughna began to meditate 
upon that excellent theme relating to Rāma and treating of 
diverse subjects and did not enter into sleep. In sooth the 
high-minded Satrughna spent the night in no time listening to 
that charming song set in musical notes. The night being 
over, he first went through the morning rites and then with 
folded hands addressed the foremost of ascetics, Vālmiki, 
saying:—"O illustrious Sir, I am anxious to see Rāma, the 
enhancer of the delight of the Raghu race. And my desire 
is that thou mayst with other illustrious Rishis, grant me 
permission on this." Satrughna, the slayer of enemies, 
having said this, the great ascetic Vālmiki embraced and 
bade him farewell. He was greatly anxious to behold Rāma 
and saluting the foremost of Munis he speedily proceeded to 
Ayodhyā. Thereupon having entered the highly picturesque city 
Ayodhyā, the graceful descendant of Ikshwākus, Satrughna 
reached where the long-armed and the highly effulgent Rāma 
was waiting. He espied there Rāma in the midst of the 
councillors like Indra amongst the immortals burning in his 
own effulgence. And having bowed with folded hands unto 
Rāma, having truth for his prowess, Satrughna said:—"O 
great king, I have carried out all thine behests; I have slain 
the vicious Lavana and filled his city with subjects. O 
descendant of Raghu, twelve years have passed away without 
thee—I do not wish to live any longer separated from thee. 
Do thou therefore, O Kākuthstha of unmitigated prowess, 
have compassion on me. Without thee, I cannot live for ever 
in a foreign province like a motherless child." He having 
said this, Rāma embraced him and said:—"Be not sorry, 
O hero. This is not a becoming action for Kshatriyas. The 
kings, O Rāghava, are never tired of living in a foreign 
land. According to the morality of the Kshatriyas, their 
greatest duty consists in governing the subjects. O heroic 
and foremost of men, do thou, at intervals, come to Ayodhyā 
to see me and return to thy own city. Forsooth thou art 
dearer than my life. But it is an incumbent duty to govern 
the kingdom. Do thou therefore, O Kākutstha, live with me 
for seven nights, and afterwards return to thy city with 
thy servants, army and conveyances." Hearing those moral 
and charming words of Rāma, Satrughna poorly replied, 
saying:—"Thy command shall be carried out." Thereupon 
Satrughna, well-skilled in the use of bows, remained with 
Rāma for seven nights and then addressed himself for 
departure. Thereupon having invited Bharata and 
Lakshmana, the high-souled Rāma, having truth for his prowess, 
speedily went for his city in a huge chariot. The high-souled 
Lakshmana and Bharata followed him on foot for some 
distance. 

SECTION LXXXVI. 
```````````````

Having bade adieu unto Satrughna, Rāma, the 
descendant of Raghu, was greatly delighted by governing his 
subjects piously in the company of Bharata and Lakshmana. 
Some days having passed in this wise—a villager, an old 
Brahman, arrived at the palace gate with a dead body. That 
Brahman, stricken with affection, again and again bewailed 
in various piteous accents, exclaiming "What heinous crime 
had I committed in my pristine birth that I have been 
constrained to witness the death of my son. My son, thou 
hast not as yet completed fourteen years. To my misery thou 
hast met with untimely death. Forsooth, for thy grief, O 
my son, myself and thy mother shall soon be snatched away 
by death. I do not remember to have ever uttered a 
falsehood, or injured an animal or perpetrated any other crime. 
Therefore for some other sinful action, this boy, without 
performing the son's duties towards his parents, has gone 
to the abode of death. Save under the regime of Rāma, 
I have never seen or heard of the dreadful death of such a 
boy who hath not attained the age. Forsooth, Rāma hath 
perpetrated a mighty iniquity for which boys, during his 
administration, have been meeting with untimely death. In 
other governments boys have no fear of such an untimely 
death. Therefore, O king confer life upon this dead child. 
Or else with my spouse I shall renounce my life at this gate 
like one having no lord. O Rāma, soiled by the sin 
consequent upon the destruction of a Brāhmana, do thou live long 
happily with brothers. O thou of great prowess, up to this 
time we have lived happily in thy kingdom. And now, O 
Rāma, under thy subjection we are being troubled with the 
sorrow of our son's death. We have been brought under 
the influence of Kāla; so in thy kingdom there is not the 
least happiness for us. Having attained Rāma as its lord, 
the kingdom, of the high-souled Ikshwākus, hath attained to 
the condition of one having no master, where during Rāma's 
regime the death of a boy hath been brought about. For 
being impiously governed by a king, for his sin, the subjects 
meet with calamities. And a king following evil tracks and not 
governing the subjects righteously people meet with untimely 
death. Therefore, when a king doth not suppress the crimes 
committed by people either in cities or provinces the fear, 
of untimely death, comes in. Evident it is therefore that 
undoubtedly the sin of the king hath appeared in cities and 
provinces. And for that reason this boy hath met with 
death." Being overwhelmed with sorrow that old Brahman 
again and again remonstrated with the king in these piteous 
words and afterwards covered the death body (of his son). 

SECTION LXXXVII.
````````````````

Hearing those sorrowful words of the Brahman, Rāma 
was greatly sorry and sent for Vasishtha, Bāmadeva, his 
brothers, citizens and councillors. Thereupon having entered 
the apartment in the company of Vasishtha, eight Brahmans 
blessed the king Rāma, resembling a celestial, saying "May 
victory crown thee." Mārkandeya, Maudgalya, Bāmadeva, 
Kashyapa, Kātyāyana, Javali, Gautama, and Narada—these 
eight leading Brāhmanas having taken their seats, Rāma, 
with folded hands, saluted them. And he showed due 
civilities towards his minister, citizens, Rishis and all others. 
Thereupon all the highly effulgent Rishis being accomodated 
with seats Rāma narrated duly before them the account of 
the Brāhmana and said. "This Brahman is waiting at the 
Palace-gate." Hearing those words of the poorly king, 
Nārada, in the presence of all other Rishis, replied:—"Hear, 
king, why this boy hath met with untimely death. And 
hearing this, O descendant of Raghu, do thou settle what 
thou thinkest proper. O king, in the golden age, only the 
Brahmans used to engage in asceticism. At that age, save the 
Brāhmanas no other caste used to lead the life of an 
anchoret. And for this, the Brahmans were the highest caste, 
effulgent in asceticism, shorn of ignorance, above death and 
conversant with three ages. Thereupon at the end of the 
golden age, Brāhmana's understanding became loose and 
the Tretā Yuga set in. At this age Kshatryas, gifted with 
the power acquired by pristine asceticism, were born. And 
those men, intent upon austere penances, that were born in 
the Tretā age, were more powerful and greater devotees than 
those in the former age. In the golden age the Brāhmanas were 
more powerful than the Kshatryas. But in the Tretā age the 
Brāhmanas and the Kshatryas were equally powerful. Thus 
in the Tretā age, not beholding prominence of the Brāhmanas 
greater than that of the Kshatryas, Manu and other religious 
leaders of the time composed the Sastra describing and 
setting in the four divisions of castes. In this wise the Tretā 
age was prolific with virtues of the four Varnas, and many 
pious sacrifices and was shorn of iniquities. But 
being attacked a little with iniquity, one portion of sin 
appeared on earth. And growing impious people lost their 
strength. And for houses and farms that were the property 
of the former age, people of the Tretā Yuga were possessed 
by envy, the outcome of the quality of darkness. And with the 
fading of impiety on earth during Tretā, the soiled sin of 
untruth appeared. And this iniquity stretching one footstep, 
the lease of people's lives, for sins, became limited. And 
the sin of untruth descending on earth, people, to avoid the 
extinction of life in consequence thereof, became truthful 
and engaged in many pious observances. During the Tretā
age the Brāhmanas and Kshatryas engaged in austere 
penances and the Vaisyas and Sudras engaged in serving 
them. And the greatest piety of the Vaisyas and Sudras 
at that time consisted of serving the Brāhmanas and 
Kshatryas and specially for the Sudras the highest religion 
was to serve people of all Varnas. O foremost of kings, at 
the end of the Tretā age, Vaisyas and Sudras being fully 
overpowered by the sin of untruth, the Brāhmanas and the 
Kshatryas also grew feeble. And the second foot of 
impiety being ushered into the world the Dwāpara age 
set in. O foremost of men, during this age two legs of 
piety being cut off, impiety and untruth multiplied. And in 
Yuga named Dwāpara the Vaisyas engaged in devout 
penances. In this wise in three ages the three Varnas 
gradually engaged in ascetic performances. The piety of 
asceticism by Yugas gradually became established in three 
Varnas. But, O foremost of men, in these three Yugas the 
Sudras were not entitled to the virtues of devout penances. 
O foremost of men, the degraded caste—the Sudras, during 
thy regime, have engaged in austere penances. And in the
Kali Yuga asceticism shall be established in the Sudras. O 
king, even in the Dwāpara, devout penances for Sudras were
considered as impiety, what to speak of the Tretā age. O
king, one Sudra, under the influence of vicious understanding 
has begun devout penances within thy kingdom. And for 
that reason this boy hath met with death. Calamity sets in 
that kingdom where a vicious-minded person commits an 
iniquity and that vicious wight and the king forsooth speedily 
repair to hell. The king, who piously governeth his subjects, 
receiveth the sixth portion of their study, asceticism and good 
actions. While the king is entitled to the sixth portion of 
everything why should he not fully protect his subjects? 
Therefore, O chief of men, do thou bring all informations of thy 
kingdom. And be then studious to repress vices wherever 
thou shalt find them. And by that, O foremost of men, the 
piety of the subjects shall be increased, the lease of their 
life shall be prolonged and this boy shall regain his life." 

SECTION LXXXVIII. 
`````````````````

Hearing the sweet words of the celestial saint Nārada 
Rāma was greatly delighted and addressing Lakshmana 
said:—"O gentle one, do thou console that foremost of 
twice-born ones and place the dead body of the boy in a jar full of 
oil. Let this body be protected by sweet-scented oil so that it 
might not be soiled by any means. See that it is not 
disfigured, its joints are not loosened and the hairs do not fall 
off." The highly illustrious Rāma, the descendant of 
Ikshwākus, thus commanded Lakshmana, gifted with 
auspicious marks, and thought of his car and desired it to come 
soon. Understanding his intention the golden car appeared 
before him in no time and saluting him said:—"O thou of 
long arms, thine chariot hath come." Hearing the sweet 
words of Pushpaka the king Rāma saluted the great ascetics, 
ascended the car with his burning bow, quiver and dagger 
and left Bharata and Lakshmana in charge of the city. And 
searching that Sudra devotee here and there Rāghava 
proceeded towards the west. And not beholding him there 
he went to the North bounded by the Himalayas. And even 
there he did not espy the Sudra ascetic and even the smallest 
iniquity was not seen there. Thereupon returning from that 
quarter the king journeyed the whole of east. And having 
sat on the Pushpaka car he saw that the eastern quarter 
was transparent like a looking glass and there was not the 
best touch of sin. From the east Rāghava proceeded 
towards the south and espied a big tank by the side of the 
Saivala mountain. On the banks of that pond one ascetic 
was performing the most austere penances with his legs 
upwards and head downwards. Thereupon approaching 
him, Rāma said—"O thou of good vows, blessed art thou; 
I do ask thee, now, O thou highly effulgent and grown old 
old in asceticism, in what Varna thou art born. I put this 
question out of curiosity. I am the son of king Daçaratha 
and my name is Rāma. For what art thou going through 
such hard austerities? Is it heaven or anything else that 
thou prayest for? O ascetic, I wish to hear of the purpose 
for which thou art performing such hard penances. Art thou
a Brahman, or an irrepresible Kshatriya or the third caste 
Vaisya or a Sudra? Do thou speak the truth and thou shaft 
be crowned with auspiciousness." Hearing the words of 
Rāma, the ascetic, whose face was downwards, gave out his 
degraded birth and communicated unto him for what he 
was performing ascetic observances. 

SECTION LXXXV. 
``````````````

Hearing the words of Rāma of unwearied actions, the 
ascetic, with his face downwards, said:—"O highly illustrious 
Rāma, I am born in the race of Sudras; and with a view to 
reach the region of the celestials with my body I am going 
through these austere penances. O Kākuthstha, I shall 
never utter a falsehood since I am willing to conquer the 
the region of gods. I am a Sudra and my name is Sambuka." 
The Sudra ascetic having said this, Rāma took out of 
scabbard a beautiful sharp sword and chopped off his head 
therewith. And that Sudra being slain, Indra, Agni and 
other celestials praised him again and again and showered 
flowers. And being greatly delighted, the celestials said to 
Rāma, having truth for his prowess:—"O thou of a great 
mind, thou hast nicely performed this god-like work. 
O slayer of foes, do thou now crave a boon. O 
descendant of Raghu, being slain by thee this Sudra 
hath been able to attain to the abode of the 
celestials." Hearing the words of the deities, Rāma, having 
truth for his prowess, said with folded hands to Purandara, 
of a thousand eyes:—"If the celestials are pleased, I beg for 
this boon that the son of the twice-born one may be restored 
to life. Do ye confer upon me this boon; this is my 
wished-for object. It is for my iniquitous conduct that this only son of 
the Brahman hath met with untimely death. Do ye restore 
him to life. I have promised before that leading twice-born 
one that I would restore his son to life—do ye therefore, 
make not me a liar." Hearing the words of Rāma the 
leading celestials delightedly said:—"Do thou return, O 
Kākutstha. The Brahmin boy shall immediately gain back 
his life and be united with his father, mother and friends. 
O Rāghava, with the death of the Sudra the boy has regained 
his life. Be thou at ease; may good betide thee. O 
foremost of men, we, too, return with delighted hearts. 
O Rāghava, we desire to behold the hermitage of the great 
saint Agastya. Having been initiated, that highly effulgent 
Brahman saint hath lived within waters for twelve years; 
his vow hath now terminated. O Kākuthstha, we shall now 
go to welcome that Muni. Do thou also follow us to see 
that saint." Saying "So be it!" to the words of the celestials 
that descendant of Raghu ascended his golden car Pushpaka. 
And having ascended spacious cars the celestials proceeded 
to the hermitage of Agastya born of a *Kumbha*. Rāma 
too also followed them. Thereupon beholding the celestials 
present the virtuous-souled Agastya, the jewel of asceticism, 
welcomed them particularly. Having accepted his worship 
and adored in return that great Muni, the immortals, delighted, 
proceeded to their abodes with their followers. The celestials 
having departed Rāma descended from Pushpaka and 
saluted that effulgent and foremost of Rishis Agastya. And 
having received due hospitality he sat there. Thereupon 
the highly effulgent and leading ascetic Kumbhajoni 
said:—"O Rāghava, I have been greatly delighted with thy coming. 
By my good fortune I have seen thee to-day. O Rāma,
I love thee because thou art gifted with many qualities. 
O king, thou art my worshipful guest. I was thinking of thee. 
The celestials informed me that thou wert coming having 
slain the Sudra ascetic. Thou hast observed piety and hast 
given back life unto the dead child of the Brahman. Do 
thou spend this night with me, O Rāghava. Thou art the 
graceful Nārāyana. In thee the whole universe is 
established. Thou art the lord of all creatures and the eternal 
Purusha. Thou shalt go to thy city next morning in thy 
Pushpaka car. This ornament, O gentle one, hath been 
made by the architect of the celestials; its make is very 
beautiful and it is dazzling by its own lustre. By accepting 
this, O Kākutstha, do thou satisfy my desire. It is said that 
one attains to best fruits if he makes present unto his deity, 
of best articles he gets from another. Thou art the only 
worthy person to use this ornament. Thou art alone capable 
of conferring best fruits. Thou dost protect Indra and other 
celestials. Therefore I do duly present thee with this 
ornament. O king, do thou accept it." Thereupon 
meditating upon the duties of the Kshatryas, the heroic Rāma, the 
foremost of the intelligent, said:—"O illustrious Sir, the 
Brāhmanas only can accept presents—how can the Kshatryas 
do? To take gifts is the function of the Brāhmanas—for 
Kshatryas it is a source of censure. Besides, to receive 
presents from a Brāhmana, is highly culpable. Do thou 
therefore tell me, how I may accept this ornament." 
Hearing the words of Rāma, the great saint Agastya replied 
saying:—"O Rāma, O son of Daçaratha, at the beginning 
of the golden age, people had no king; but Vāsava was the ruler 
of the celestials. Therefore to obtain a king, men approached 
Brahmā, the god of gods and said 'O deity thou hast placed 
Indra as ruler over the celestials; therefore, O lord of 
creatures, do thou also confer upon us a king who shall be 
foremost among men; by worshipping him we shall be freed 
from all sins. We shall not live without the king—even 
this is our firm resolution.' Thereupon the Patriarch 
Brahmā sent for Indra and other deities and said:—'Do ye 
all give a portion of your respective energies.' Thereupon 
the deities gave each a portion of their own energies. 
Thereupon Brahma made a *Khshupa* or sound and therefrom 
originated a king under the name of *Khshupa*. And in 
his person Brahmā placed in equal proportions the energies 
of the deities. Thereafter he made *Khshupa* the foremost 
king of men. By virtue of the portion of Indra's energy 
the king *Khshupa* brought the earth under his control; by 
that of Varuna’s energy he fostered his own body; by Kuvera’s 
portion he conferred riches upon his subjects; and by that 
of Yama he governed them. Therefore, O Rāma, by virtue 
of Indra's portion, do thou accept this ornament and confer 
upon me the salvation." Hearing the words of the Muni, Rāma 
took from him that brilliant celestial ornament burning like 
the rays of the Sun. And having taken that excellent 
ornament, Dāçarathi asked the great saint Kumbhayoni, 
saying:—"Whence hast thou obtained this celestial ornament 
of a wondrous make? Who hast given thee this? 
Brahman, I do accost thee thus out of curiosity. Thou 
art the mine of many wonders." Whereto Agastya replied, 
saying "Hearken, O Rāma, how I did obtain this ornament 
in the Tretā age." 

SECTION XC. 
```````````

"O Rāma, in Tretā age, there was a huge forest 
extending over a hundred Yojanas divested of animals and men. 
In that forest I used to perform my austere penances. Once 
on a time I began to roam all over the forest being willing 
to see well every nook and corner of it. And I saw that 
it was impossible to ascertain how very pleasant that forest 
was. In every place there were trees with profuse sweet 
fruits and roots. In the middle I espied a pond extending 
over a Yojana. There was no moss in that deep, calm, 
clear and sweet water; there were lotuses and lilies and 
swans, Kārandāvas, Chakravakas and many other water 
fowls were playing in the waters. O lord of creatures, at no 
distance from that pond I saw an old, holy hermitage but 
there was no creature or animal around it. It was summer 
and I spent that night in that hermitage. Next 
morning leaving my bed I arrived at the banks 
of the pond and saw a plump dead body in the waters. 
None of its limbs was pale and its beauty was not spoiled. 
Beholding it and standing on the banks I began to meditate 
upon it. And thought I 'What is this?' In a moment I 
espied a beautiful car, swift-coursing like the mind and 
drawn by ganders. And I saw in that chariot a celestial 
person. He was being attended by Apasaras adorned with 
celestial ornaments and having lotus-eyes. Some of them 
were singing, some dancing and some playing on Mridanga, 
Vina and other musical instruments and some were fanning 
his lotus-like countenance with valuable, golden chowries, 
dazzling like the rays of the moon. O Rāma, the foremost 
of Raghu’s race, like unto the moon renouncing the summit 
of the Sumeru mount that celestial wight got down from 
his seat in the car and engaged in devouring the dead body. 
And having taken enough flesh he got down into waters and 
duly performed ablution. And thereafter that heavenly 
being again addressed himself for ascending the car. O 
foremost of men, beholding that heavenly being about to 
get up I accosted him, saying ‘Who art thou? I see, thou hast 
a celestial form, then why hast thou taken such an 
abominable food? O thou adored of the immortals, persons like 
thee should not take such meals. O gentle one, I have been 
striken with great curiosity and wish to hear all. Thine 
living upon dead body doth not appear agreeable unto me.’ 
O king, plainly and out of curiosity I put to him these 
questions. And hearing them, the celestial being related 
everything unto me." 

SECTION CXI. 
````````````

"O Rāma, hearing my words pregnant with sound 
reasoning, that heavenly being, with folded hands, said 
'Hear, O Brahman, from what unavoidable cause hath 
proceeded this happy and again painful incident. There 
flourished in the days of yore a highly illustrious and 
powerful Vidarbha king under the name of Sudeva known 
over three worlds. He was my father. His two queens gave 
birth to two sons. My name is Sweta and the name of my 
youngest brother was Suratha. After the decease of my sire 
the subjects installed me on the throne and I governed them 
piously and carefully for a thousand years. By some reason 
I was informed of the extent of my life. And when I 
perceived that the lease of my life had well-nigh expired 
I entered into the life of Banaprasta. And having placed 
my brother Suratha on the throne I entered into a dense 
forest devoid of men and animals at no distance from this 
pond to perform devout penances. And I performed 
austerities for a long time near this pond. Having performed 
hard penances in this forest, for three thousand years I at 
last attained to the region of Brahmā. And albeit I had 
reached the Brahmā region I was still being assailed by 
hunger and thirst. And gradually I grew tired therewith. 
Thereupon approaching the patriarch Brahmā, the lord of 
three worlds, I said:—"O Brahmā, here there is no hunger 
or thirst; still why have I been brought to their control? 
Of what iniquity of mine is this fruit? O deity, tell me 
upon what I shall live?" Whereto the patriarch 
replied;—"O son of Sudeva, do thou live upon sweet savoured meat 
everyday? O Sweta, thou didst only look to the growth of 
thy person when thou didst perform rigid penances. O thou 
of a great mind, nothing grows, when nothing is sown. 
Thou didst only perform ascetic penances, but thou didst not 
make any gift of charity. It is for that reason, O my son, 
that thou art, even in heaven, being assailed by hunger and 
thirst. Thereupon do thou now live upon thine own dead body 
fostered by various food. By this thou shalt keep up thy 
being. O Sweta, thou shalt be relieved from this affliction 
when the irrepressible, great Saint Agastya shall reach that 
forest. O gentle one, even unto the immortals he can give 
salvation; what wonder it is that he shall relieve thee from 
the miseries of hunger and thirst." O foremost of 
twice-born ones, from the time of hearing those words of the great 
Brahmā, the god of gods, I have been engaged in this cursed 
work of feeding upon my own dead body. O Brahman, 
for many long years I have been living upon this corpse 
still I have not done with it. O Saint, I, too, derive 
satisfaction from it; I now understand that thou art the illustrious 
Agastya born of a Kumbha; for none else is capable of 
coming here; do thou therefore save me from this pain, who 
am afflicted with great miseries. O foremost of twice-born 
ones, O gentle one, do thou take this ornament; may good betide 
thee. Do thou be propitiated with me. O Brahman, I do 
confer upon thee, gold, riches various clothes, eatables, 
excellent ornaments and diverse other objects of desire and 
enjoyment. O foremost of Munis, do thou with compassion 
save me.' Hearing those words of the heavenly being, 
exciting pity, I accepted this ornament for saving him. And 
as soon as I took this ornament that human body of the 
royal saint disappeared. And the body being dissolved, the 
royal saint Sweta, greatly delighted, happily went to the 
land of immortals. It is for this reason, O Kākutstha, that 
royal saint, resembling Indra, conferred upon me this 
wondrous, celestial ornament." 

SECTION CXII. 
`````````````

Hearing the wondrous words of the great saint 
Kumbhayoni, Rāma, out of great curiosity and importance of the 
subject, again asked him, saying:—"O Brahman, why was 
that dense forest, in which the king Sweta used to perform 
hard penances, divested of birds and animals? And how 
did he proceed to that forest devoid of men and animals 
for undergoing penances? I wish to hear the truth." 
Hearing the words of Rāma stricken with curiosity, the highly 
effulgent saint Agastya said:—"O Rāma, formerly in the 
golden age, Manu was the king. His son was Ikshwāku. 
Having installed the irrepressible Ikshwāku, Manu said: 
'Be thou the lord over creatures.' Saying 'So be it' Ikshwāku 
accepted the command. Thereupon greatly delighted Manu
said to his son:—'I have been highly pleased with thee. 
For sooth thou shalt become a very liberal prince. Thou
shalt govern the subjects meting out proper punishment 
unto them, but do not punish them without any fault. If 
the punishment, which a king inflicts upon the guilty, be 
just it becomes the instrumental in taking the giver to 
heaven. Therefore, O my son having large arms, be particularly 
studious as regards punishment for thereby thou shalt 
acquire great piety.' Having in this wise advised Ikshwāku 
Manu delightedly repaired to the region of Brahmā. After 
Manu's departure, the effulgent Ikshwāku thought of the 
means for creating progeny. Thereupon performing many 
pious rites Manu's son engendered a hundred sons. O 
descendant of Raghu, the youngest of all those sons became 
stupid and ignorant and did not respect his elder brothers. 
And thinking that he should therefore be punished he 
named this son 'Danda.' Thereupon finding no other 
province worthy of Danda he allotted the region between 
Vindhya and Saivala to him. Danda became king of that 
picturesque valley. And having reared a fine city there he 
named it as Madhumanta and appointed Sukracharja of 
firm vows as his priest. Having thus established his kingdom, 
Danda, with his priest, began to lord over it filled with 
healthy and delighted people like unto the lord of celestials 
in their region. O Rāma, like unto Mahendra governing 
his kingdom of heaven under the guidance of Vrihaspati, 
the preceptor of celestials, Danda, the grand-son of Manu, 
governed his own kingdom with the help of Usanās." 

SECTION XCIII. 
``````````````

Having related this story unto Rāma the great saint 
Agastya again said:—"O Kākutstha, having subdued his 
passions, the king Danda, reigned undisturbed in this wise 
for many long years. Thereupon during spring, in the 
month of Chaitra the king arrived at the picturesque 
hermitage of the preceptor Sukra. At that time, Sukra's 
daughter, matchless in beauty and grace, was walking in the 
forest. The king saw that jewel of a girl, and being 
stricken with lust and growing restless he approached her 
and said:—'O thou having a beautiful waist, O fair lady, 
whose daughter art thou? O thou having a moonlike 
countenance, I have been assailed by the arrows of Cupid and 
hence I do accost thee thus.' Hearing the words of the 
vicious-souled Danda, maddened with lust, Sukra's daughter 
humbly said:—'O king of kings I am the daughter of the 
preceptor Sukra of unwearied actions and my name is Arajās. 
I am living in this hermitage—king, do not touch me 
forcibly for I am a maid and hence under the guardianship 
of my father. Besides my father is my preceptor, and thou 
art also his disciple. Being enraged he shall imprecate thee 
with a curse. O foremost of men, if thou dost cherish any 
desire for me, do thou honestly and piously pray for it unto 
my sire. Or else thou shalt suffer dreadful consequences 
in the long run. When worked up with ire, my father can 
reduce even the three worlds to ashes. O thou of a 
blameless person, if thou dost pray, my father may make me over 
unto thy hands.' Arajās having said this, the king Danda, 
maddened with lust, placing folded palms on his head, 
said:—'Be thou propitiated with me, O thou having a graceful 
person; do not tarry even for a moment. My heart bursts 
out for thee, O thou having a moon-like countenance. For 
acquiring thee I can even take upon myself my own 
destruction or dreadful iniquity. Do thou seek me, O fair 
lady—I am beside myself for thee.' Having said this the king 
forcibly ravished her. Having perpetrated such a mighty 
iniquity he speedily returned to his own city Madhumanta. 
Arajās cried aloud in forest at no distance from the 
hermitage and waited for her sire who had been away on 
visiting the celestials." 

SECTION XCIV. 
`````````````

"Thereupon having heard everything about Arajās from 
a disciple, he, surrounded by his pupils, arrived at his own 
hermitage and beheld her there poorly, soiled with dust and 
like unto the morning rays of the moon possessed by a 
planet. He was stricken with hunger and was greatly 
incensed on beholding his daughter in that wretched plight, 
as if burning the three worlds with rage. Addressing his 
pupils he said:—'Do ye witness today the dreadful calamity, 
arising out of my flaming ire, of the vicious Danda treading 
the path of immorality. This vicious wight hath placed his 
hands in the burning flame so he shall, along with followers, 
meet with destruction. Since that vile being hath 
perpetrated such a dreadful crime he shall forsooth suffer the 
consequence thereof. Within seven nights, the wicked and 
vicious Danda, with his son, soldiers and retinue, shall meet 
with death. Showering dust Indra shall destroy, 
to the extent of a hundred Yojana, the territory of 
this vicious king. And all creatures mobile and immobile, 
wherever they might be, shall be destroyed with this 
downpour of dust. All animals as far as this Dandas' territory 
extends, shall be destroyed within seven nights.' Having 
said this, with eyes reddened with ire, Usanās, Vrigu’s son, 
said to the inmates of his hermitage:—'Do ye all go and 
wait outside this kingdom.' Hearing the words of the 
preceptor Sukra, the inmates left the hermitage and lived 
at a place beyond the limit of Danda’s territories. Having 
thus addressed the inmates of the hermitage the great saint, 
said to Arajas. 'O unfortunate girl, with a devoted mind 
do thou wait at this hermitage. Without any anxiety, 
O Arajās, do thou wait for the time at the picturesque banks 
of this pond extending over a Yojana. Within seven nights 
whoever shall approach thee, shall be destroyed with this 
downpour of dust.' Hearing the words of the Brāhmana 
saint and preceptor Sukra, Arajās sorrowfully said to her 
father 'It shall be done.' Thereupon Sukracharjya went 
away and lived elsewhere. According to the words of the 
saint, the entire kingdom of Danda, with servants, army, 
and conveyances, was destroyed within seven nights. 
Rāma, in the golden age, the province between the 
mountains Vindhya and Saivala comprising Danda's territories, 
imprecated by the Brahman saint, in consequence of the 
iniquity of the vicious souled, was reduced into a desert. 
From that time it passes by the name of Dandaka forest. 
And it is otherwise called Janasthāna because the ascetics 
used to perform austerities there. O Rāghava, I have 
thus related unto thee, all thou didst ask of me. O hero, 
the time for performing evening rites hath come. Behold 
foremost of men, having performed ablution, the great saints, 
on all sides, with jars full of water, are worshipping the 
sun. Having accepted adoration in the shape of Vedic 
hymns chanted by Brahmans, well-versed in Vedas, the illustrious
Aditya is about to be set. Therefore, O Rāma, do 
thou perform the ceremony." 

SECTION XCV. 
````````````

Hearing the words of the great saint, Rāma, to 
perform the evening adoration, went to the pond filled with 
Apsarās; and having performed the worship he again returned 
to the hermitage of the high-souled Agastya. Thereupon 
the great ascetic offered him as food many substantial 
Kanda, roots, Oshadis and the holy Sāli rice. And taking that 
nectar-like cooked rice, Rāma, the foremost of men, was 
greatly delighted and spent the night there. Having got up 
in the morning and performed the necessary ceremonies he 
approached the ascetic to bid farewell, and saluting him 
said:—"O great Rishi, I do crave for thy permission to go 
to my own habitation. Do thou permit me. O high-souled 
one, I have been highly favoured and blessed by beholding 
thee. I shall come again some other time to free myself 
from sins." Hearing those wondrous words of Rāma, Agastya 
having asceticism for his wealth, delightedly said:—"O Rāma 
these words, set in charming letters, are highly wonderful.
O descendant of Raghu, thou art the purifier of all creatures. 
O Rāma, one, who beholds thee, even for a moment, 
becomes pure and worthy of repairing to heaven. Even the 
leading deities worship him. Those on earth, who cast dreadful 
looks on thee, are immediately brought under the control 
of Yama and are constrained to go to hell. O foremost of 
Raghus, thou art the purifier of all creatures; people become 
perfect even if they only chant thy glories. Kākutstha, 
do thou now go with ease and fearlessly, and govern thy 
kingdom righteously. O Rāma thou art the refuge of the 
world." Hearing the words of the great and truthful Rishi 
the wise Rāma, with folded hands, saluted him and other 
Rishis, and with serene air ascended the golden car Pushpaka. 
Like unto the immortals welcoming the Chief of the deities, the 
Rishis showered blessings, upon Rāma from all sides while 
he was proceeding. And seated on car, he appeared like 
the moon, after the expiry of the rainy season. Thereupon 
being welcomed by the villagers on his way he reached 
Ayodhyā at noon and descended at the middle apartment. 
And having permitted the charming chariot coursing at will 
to go away he said:—"Do thou now go; may good betide 
thee." Thereupon he said to the warder, "Do thou speedily 
go and having communicated my arrival unto Lakshmana 
and Bharata bring them here."

SECTION CXVI.
`````````````

According to the command of Rāma of unwearied 
actions, the warders went to the princes and communicated 
unto them (the arrival). Beholding Bharata and Lakshmana 
present, Rāma embraced them and said:—"I have, as 
promised, performed the work of the excellent twice-born one. 
I wish now to perform a Rajshuya sacrifice, the source of 
religious glory, the destroyer of all sins, inexhaustible and 
un-ending. Therefore, with you like my own self, I wish 
to engage in the most excellent and eternal Rajshuya 
sacrifice. O slayer of foes, by celebrating Rajshuya, Mitra 
attained to the dignity of Varuna. And having celebrated 
the same sacrifice, Soma, conversant with piety, established 
eternal fame in the three worlds. Do ye therefore consult with 
me even today as to what is proper. Do ye consider 
carefully and tell me what is auspicious and productive of 
well-being in the long run." Hearing the words of Rāghava, 
Bharata, well-skilled in the art of speech, with folded 
hands, said "O pious Sir in thee are established 
piety, earth and fame. O thou of unmitigated 
prowess, as the deities honor the patriarch so other kings 
hold thee in reverence. O king, all creatures mobile and 
immobile consider thee as their father. O thou of great 
strength, thou art the refuge of all animals and of the universe. 
Therefore of what use is such a sacrifice unto thee? In 
such a sacrifice all the royal families meet with ruin. All 
those kings, who are proud of manliness, being incensed with 
great ire on the occasion of this sacrifice, shall bring ruin 
upon all. O foremost of men, the whole earth has been 
brought under thy subjection so it is not proper to devastate 
it." Hearing those sweet accents of Bharata, Rāma, having 
truth for his prowess, attained to incomparable delight, and
addressed the enhancer of Kaikeyi's delight with kind words,
saying:—"O thou freed from sins, I have been greatly 
delighted with thee. O foremost of men, for the preservation 
of earth, thou hast given vent to words, without any hesitation, 
pregnant with manliness and piety. O thou conversant with 
piety, according to thy wise counsels, I refrain from 
celebrating this Rajshuya sacrifice. The wise should never undertake 
all those works which give affliction unto people. O elder 
brother of Lakshmana, it is proper to take wise counsels even 
from a boy." 

SECTION CXVII. 
``````````````

After the conversation between Rāma and Bharata
had been over, Lakshmana, with reasonable words, said to the 
former:—"O worshipful Sir, amongst sacrifices Aswamedha 
is the best and the remover of all sins; it is my prayer 
therefore that thy desire might be turned towards this great and 
highly purifying sacrifice. It is said in this Purānas, that 
Purandara, sullied by the sin consequent upon slaying a 
Brāhmana, was again purified by celebrating a horse sacrifice. 
O thou having long arms, formerly, during the war between 
gods and demons there flourished a highly honored Asura 
under the name of Vitra. The breadth of his body was a 
hundred Yojanas and the height thereof was three hundred 
Yojanas. Considering all under his subjection he used to 
regard them with affection. He was pious, grateful and used 
to perform nothing without proper deliberation. And 
treading pious tracks he used to govern his subjects very carefully. 
During his administration earth produced all wished-for 
objects; roots and fruits were tasteful and flowers 
were fragrant. Without being cultivated earth used to yield 
crops. In this wise for many long years he governed a 
prosperous and wonderful kingdom. Thereupon he 
determined upon performing a hard penance. He considered 
asceticism as the best of all and regarded all other things 
as mere illusions. Having resolved thus and placed his son 
Madhureswara on the throne Vitra engaged in austerities 
creating terror unto all deities. He being thus engaged in 
asceticism, Indra, greatly terrified, approached Vishnu and 
said:—'O thou having long arms, by virtue of his asceticism
Vitra is about to conquer all the worlds. He is pious, so I 
cannot subdue him. O illustrious Sir, if his ascetic powers 
grow more we shall be constrained to live under 
his control for ever from the creation. Do thou 
therefore not neglect any longer this highly generous Asura. 
Thyself being enraged, O lord of deities, Vitra shall not live 
even for a moment. O Vishnu, from the time he succeeded 
in propitiating thee, he hath obtained the sovereignty of the 
three worlds. Do thou, therefore, be propitiated now; save 
thee none can free this world from thorns and bring it at 
rest. O Vishnu, all the deities are waiting for thee; do thou 
help them by slaying Vitra. O thou having a large mind, 
thou art always the help of these high-souled deities. It is 
impossible for any one else to accomplish the present work. 
Thou art the refuge of the helpless.'" 

SECTION XCVIII. 
```````````````

Hearing the words of Lakshmana, Rāma, the slayer 
of enemies, said:—"O thou of firm vows, do thou at length, 
describe the destruction of Vitra." Hearing the words of 
Rāghava, Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumitrā's delight, again 
took up that theme. "Hearing the words of Indra and other 
deities Vishnu replied:—'From before I am bound with the 
high-souled Vitra by the ties of friendship. For this, even 
for your satisfaction, I shall not (myself) slay him. Again 
I am to afford excellent felicity unto you. I shall myself divide 
you into three classes and then forsooth your king shall be 
able to destroy Vitra. Of those three portions the first shall 
be able to slay him.' Vishnu, the god of gods, having said 
this, the deities replied, saying:—'O slayer of demons, 
undoubtedly what thou hast said, shall prove true; may 
victory crown thee; we proceed now to slay Vitra. O highly 
generous deity, do thou now make Vāsava powerly by 
infusing thy own energy.' Thereupon the highly powerful 
immortals headed by Indra entered the forest where the great 
Asura Vitra was performing austerities. Arriving there 
they observed that the leading Asura was spreading rays 
all over—the outcome of his own effulgence, as if devouring 
the three worlds and burning down the quarters. Beholding 
that foremost of Asuras, the deities were greatly terrified 
and began to think of plans by which they would be able 
to slay him and not be defeated. While they were thus 
thinking, Indra, of thousand eyes, taking up a thunderbolt,
hurled it against Vitra's head. That dreadful burning 
thunderbolt, like unto the fire of dissolution, falling on Vitra's 
head, the three Worlds were agitated. Thereupon thinking 
that he has perpetrated an iniquity by slaying Vitra engaged 
in asceticism, Indra, out of fear, fled to the other side of 
*Lokaloka*, perpetually enshrowded with darkness. And the 
sin, consequent upon the destruction of a Brahman, pursuing 
him vehemently, entered into his person. In this wise Indra 
became subject to dreadful afflictions. Beholding the enemy 
slain and Indra fled, the deities headed by fire again and 
again chanted the glories of Vishnu—the lord of three 
worlds, saying 'O great god, thou art the refuge of the 
three worlds. Thou art the first-born and the father of the 
universe. For protecting all creatures thou hast assumed 
this Vishnu form. Thou hast slain this Vitra but the sin of
slaying a Brahman has visited Indra. Therefore, O excellent 
Purusha, do thou so arrange that he may be freed from sins.' 
Hearing the words of the celestials Vishnu said—'Let your
Chief celebrate a sacrifice in my honor—and by that he shall 
be cleansed of the sin. If the slayer of Pāka celebrates a 
horse sacrifice, he shall again fearlessly be installed as the 
chief of deities.' Having addressed these nectar-like words 
to the deities and being glorified by them, Vishnu, the god of 
gods, returned to his abode." 

SECTION XCIX. 
`````````````

Having thus described at length and finished the story 
of Vitra's destruction Lakshmana said:—"The mighty Vitra, 
the terror of the deities, being slain, and the slayer Indra, 
being assailed by the sin of Brahmanicide, was bewildered 
and at a loss to ascertain his duty. Being at his wit's end 
he repaired to the other side of the *Lokaloka* mountain and 
remained there for some time like a coiled serpent. And 
again in consequence of Indra's separation, the whole world 
was agitated, the forests grew dried and the earth was 
devoid of water. On account of the rivers being dried up and 
want of rain all creatures grew impatient. In this wise, the 
time of the destruction of creatures having arrived, the 
celestials being stricken with anxiety, according to the 
previous command of Vishnu, engaged in celebrating the 
sacrifice With Rishis and Ritwikas they fearfully 
approached Purandara; and beholding him assailed by the sin of 
Brahmanicide, they with him, at their head, engaged in 
celebrating a horse-sacrifice. After the sacrifice the 
sin issued out of Indra's person and addressing the 
high-souled deities said 'Do ye all ascertain, where I shall go 
now.' Thereupon highly pleased the deities replied:—'Do 
thou divide thyself into four portions.' Hearing the words of 
the high-souled celestials she divided herself into four parts, 
and wishing for a separate habitation said:—'By one portion, 
I shall at my pleasure, live in rivers full of water during 
rains and shall obstruct people from going there. By my 
second portion I shall live perpetually on lands as *Ushara*; [#]_ 
I tell you the truth. By my third portion I shall for three 
nights every month live in youthful women proud of their 
youth—so that men might not live with them. And by my 
fourth portion I shall enter into the persons of those who 
shall slay innocent Brāhmanas.' Hearing those words the 
deities said 'What thou hast said shall be carried out. Do 
what thou wishest.' Thereupon the celestials, delighted, 
adored their Chief divested of sins and crowned with victory. 
And Vāsava being installed again on the throne, the whole 
universe was at rest. Thereupon Indra worshipped Vishnu 
in the shape of that wonderful sacrifice. O descendant of 
Raghu, such is the power of a horse-sacrifice." Hearing the 
charming words of Lakshmana, the energetic and high-souled 
king, Rāma, powerful like Indra, was greatly delighted.

.. [#] A spot with saline soil.

SECTION C. 
``````````

Hearing the words of Lakshmana and smiling, the 
highly effulgent descendant of Raghu, Rāma, skilled in the 
art of speech, replied:—"Lakshmana, O foremost of men, 
thou hast truly related the story of Vitra's destruction and 
the fruits of horse-sacrifice. O gentle one, I have heard, 
that formerly in the province of Valheeka, the graceful king 
Ila, the son of the patriarch Kardama, was highly pious. O 
foremost of men, having brought the entire earth under his 
control, the highly illustrious king Ila used to govern his 
subjects like unto his own sons. O descendant of Raghu, 
being terrified, the generous deities, the rich Daityas, the 
highly powerful Nāgas, the irrepressible Rākshasas, 
Gandharvas and Yakshas used to adore him perpetually. The 
high-souled Ila being enraged, the three worlds used to be 
convulsed with terror. And albeit so very powerful the 
highly illustrious king of Valheeka never swerved from the 
path of morality nor neglected his deities and rather 
intelligently used to administer all business. Once on a time in 
the picturesque season of spring the mighty-armed Ila, with 
his army and conveyances, entered into a charming forest, 
and on the pretext of hunting, slew hundreds and thousands 
of deer. With slaying deer only the high-souled king 
was not satisfied. He slew millions of diverse other 
animals. In this way being engaged in hunting the 
king Ila arrived where Kartikeya was born. At that time, in 
that hilly fountain there was sporting in the company of his 
followers, the irrepressible god of gods, the three-eyed deity 
with the daughter of the Chief of mountains. Being desirous 
of satisfying the goddess Umā, her lord, whose emblem is 
bull, was sporting under the guise of a female. In that forest 
land, all male animals or trees were metamorphosed into 
the other sex at that time. A-hunting, the king Ila, the son 
of Kardama, arrived at that place and saw all animals and trees 
changed into female forms. And immediately the king, 
and his army were changed into similar forms. Finding 
himself in that plight the king Ila was greatly sorry, and thinking 
that the misfortune was owing to the influence of the god 
of gods—Umā's lord, he was greatly terrified. Thereupon 
with his followers and army the king took shelter of the 
high-souled and red-throated deity. Thereupon the great god, 
the conferrer of boons, with the goddess, smiling 
said:—'Rise up, O son of Kardama, O thou of great strength, O 
gentle one, do thou beg of me any other boon than that of 
obtaining thy manhood.' Being thus disappointed by the 
great deity, the king Ila, metamorposed into a female, became 
greatly sorry and did not pray for any other boon. Being 
stricken with great sorrow, the king, with whole heart, saluted 
the daughter of the mountain-chief and said:—'O goddess, 
thou art the protectress of all—thou dost confer boons on all; 
seeing thee doth not become fruitless. Do thou therefore 
have compassion on me.' Thereupon, cognizant of that 
king's intention, the goddess, with Hara's consent, 
said:—'Half of the boon, that thou shalt beg of us both, shall be 
granted by Mahadeva, and the other half shall be granted by
me. Do thou therefore beg of me the half.' Hearing of 
that excellent and wondrous boon the king became greatly 
delighted and said:—'If thou art pleased with me, O 
goddess, do thou confer upon me this boon, that I may be for 
one month, a female gifted with wonderful beauty in the 
three worlds and for another month I may be a male.' 
Thereupon understanding king's desire, the beautiful goddess 
Pārvati, mercifully said:—'The boon, according to thy 
desire, shall be granted. O king, when thou shalt attain 
to the male figure, thou shalt not remember anything of thy
female form. And when thou shalt assume the charming 
female figure thou shalt forget everything of thy male state.' 
O Lakshmana, by virtue of this boon, the king Ila for one 
month used to become a man and for the next used to 
become a female, charming in the three worlds under the name 
of Ilā."

SECTION CI. 
```````````

Having heard of the story of the king Ila from Rāma, 
Lakshmana and Bharata were greatly surprised. And with 
folded hands they, requesting the noble king Rāma for further 
particulars, said:—"How could the king Ila subject himself 
to those afflictions in the shape of a female? And how did he 
use to behave himself in his male form?" Hearing those words 
begotten of curiosity, Rāma engaged in relating the whole story 
as he had heard before, saying:—"In the first month, 
assuming his female form having lotus-eyes and charming the three 
world, he used to sport in the forest abounding in groves, in 
the company of his companions metamorphosed into the 
same form. Having sent away all his conveyances he used 
to sport in the mountain vale. Thus roaming, Ilā one day 
espied Budha, a bundle of rays, resembling the full moon in 
a picturesque pond filled with birds at some distance from the 
mountain. Having compassion for all creatures Budha, at 
that time, was performing, hard, glorious and wished-for 
austerities within waters. O son of Raghu, on beholding him 
Ilā was greatly surprised, and with her female companions 
began to agitate waters. As soon as Budha saw her he was 
assailed by the arrows of Cupid. Not being able to control 
himself he grew impatient within waters and thought “This 
damsel is far more beautiful even than the celestial girls. 
I have never seen before a like beauty amongst the celestials, 
Nāgas, Asuras and Apsarās. If she has not been married 
before then she is my worthy spouse." With this resolution 
Budha got up from the waters, and repairing to his hermitage, 
sent for the fair ones. They all saluted him. Thereupon 
the virtuous-souled Budha accosted them saying:—"Whose 
daughter is this graceful girl amongst you and for what she 
has come here? Do not delay—tell me soon." Hearing 
those sweet words of his, the females said:—"This fair damsel 
is our supreme lady. She has no husband. Journeying she 
has come here with us." Hearing those plain words, Budha 
thought of the learning by which one can perceive everything. 
And being informed of all regarding the king Ila thereby he 
said—"Do ye all live in this mountain being *Kimpurusas*; do 
ye make your respective habitations here. I shall give you 
always fruits and roots. O ye females, you shall have all 
*Kimpurusas* as your husbands." According to the words of 
Budha they lived in that mountain as *Kimpurusas*. In this 
wise many *Kimpurusa-Budhas* were procreated. 

SECTION CII.
````````````

Having heard of the origin of *Kimpurushas*, both 
Bharata and Lakshmana said to Rāma:—"This is a 
wonderful story." Thereupon the highly illustrious Rāma, the 
foremost of the pious, again began with the story of Ila, the 
son of the patriarch. "Beholding the Kinnaris repairing to a 
distance, Budha the foremost of ascetics, smiling said, to 
the beautiful Ilā:—"O thou of a graceful presence, I am the 
most favourite son of the moon; O fair one, do thou, with 
delight, cast looks upon me," Hearing the words of the 
highly effulgent and beautiful Budha in the picturesque forest 
land divested of men and animals, Ilā said:—"O gentle 
one, I am not subject to any body; I surrender myself unto 
thee out of my own accord. O son of Soma, thou mayst 
command me whatever thou wishest." Hearing those 
wondrous words, the son of moon, possessed by lust, began to live 
with her. And living in the company of Ilā, having a 
graceful countenance, Budha, possessed by desire, spent the entire 
month of Madhu like a moment. Thereupon after the expiry 
of a month, the graceful king Ila, son of the pariarch, awoke 
from sleep and beholding Budha, the son of Soma, engaged 
in austerities with uplifted hands in the midst of waters, 
said:—"O illustrious Sir, with my followers I entered this 
dense forest—I do not see them now anywhere. Where have 
they gone?" Hearing the words of the royal saint, who had 
lost all recollection, Budha, with sweet words consoled him 
and said:—"All thy followers have been destroyed by a 
downpour of huge rocks; thyself, being afraid of the storm, 
was also asleep in the hermitage. Thou hast no fear now. 
Therefore, O hero, being consoled and renouncing all anxiety 
do thou live here happily living upon fruits and roots." 
Being comforted by those words, the high-minded king Ila, 
striken with distress in consequence of the destruction of 
his servants, poorly replied:—"O Brahman, I shall renounce 
my own kingdom. Separated from my servants, I shall not 
be able to live, even for a moment. Do thou give me 
permission in this. O Brahman, my eldest son, the highly 
illustrious Sasabindu, the foremost of the pious, shall be the 
owner of my kingdom. O Brahman, renouncing my servants 
and wives of the country I shall not be able to wait here. 
Therefore, O highly effulgent one, do thou not give me such 
an unpleasant command of remaining here." Hearing those 
wonderful words of the king Ila, Budha consoling him, 
said:—"Do thou wait here. Be not aggrieved, O highly 
powerful son of Kardama. If thou dost live here for a year, 
I shall render thy well-being." Hearing the words of Budha, 
of unwearied actions, the king Ila desired to live there. 
Thereupon becoming a man for the next month he began 
to perform ascetic penances. Thereupon in the ninth month, 
Ilā, having a beautiful waist, gave birth to a highly effulgent 
son, under the name of Pururavā, born of the loins of Budha, 
and equally graceful like him. And she handed over the 
highly powerful son unto his father Budha. Thereupon after 
a year Ila having regained the male form, Budha by means 
of various words afforded delight unto him. 

SECTION CIII.
`````````````

Rāma having thus described the wonderful birth of 
Pururava, the illustrious Bharata and Lakshmana asked him 
again saying:—"O foremost of men, tell us what did Ila 
afterwards do after living in the company of Soma's son 
for a year." Hearing their sweet words Rāma again began 
with the story of Kardama's son and said:—"In turn, the 
heroic Ila, having regained his manhood, the highly 
illustrious and intelligent Budha, well-informed of birth and 
well-skilled in the art of speech, sent for the highly liberal 
Sangbarta, Vrigu's son Chyavana, Aristhanemi, the foremost 
of Munis, Durvasa, capable of affording delight, and other 
friends gifted with patience and said:—'Ye all know well, how 
this mighty-armed Ila, Kardama's son, attained to this peculiar 
condition.' Thereupon while those high-souled ones were 
conversing upon this subject, the highly effulgent Kardama 
arrived at the hermitage. Pulastya, Kratu, Vashatkar and 
the highly effulgent Omkāra came there following him. 
Being greatly delighted for their arrival they all gave out 
their individual opinion for bringing about the well-being of 
the king of Vālhakee. For the welfare of his son, the patriarch 
Kardama said:—'Hear, O twice-born ones, how the 
well-being of the king Ila may be secured. For this disease I 
do not find any other good medicine but Umā's lord. And 
save Aswamedha there is no other sacrifice more favourite 
unto the high-souled deity. Let us all therefore celebrate 
that hard sacrifice on behalf of this king.' Thereupon 
Sambarta's disciple, the royal saint Marutha, the conqueror 
of enemies' cities, collected all articles for the sacrifice. 
Thereupon in the vicinity of Budha's hermitage that mighty 
sacrifice was celebrated. And by that the Great Rudra 
attained to delight and said to the twice-born ones, in the 
presence of the king Ila:—'O foremost of twice-born ones, 
I have been greatly delighted with this sacrifice and your 
devotion. Tell me now, what I can do for this king of 
Valheeka.' Hearing the words of Mahādeva, the Brāhmanas, 
having propitiated him with great devotion, prayed for Ila's 
manhood. Thereupon delighted the highly effulgent 
Mahādeva, having conferred upon him manhood, disappeared. In 
this wise the horse-sacrifice being finished and Mahādeva 
having disappeared, the far-seeing and leading twice-born 
ones repaired to their respective hermitages. And having 
placed his eldest son Sasavindu as the king of the country 
of Vālheeka, the king Ila reared another city in the middle 
country. In time Ila attained to the excellent Brahmā 
region and his son Pururāva obtained that Pratishthāna 
kingdom. O foremost of men, such is the power of the  
horse-sacrifice, that the king Ila, though converted into a female,
regained manhood by virtue thereof." 

SECTION CIV. 
````````````

Having thus addressed his both brothers, Rāma, the 
descendant of Kakuthstha of unmitigated prowess, again said 
to Lakshmana, in words pregnant with morality:—"O 
Lakshmana, having invited Vasishtha, the foremost of 
twice-born ones, conversant with all the rites of Aswamedha, 
Vamadeva, Javali, and Kashyapa and consulted with them 
duly I shall set free a horse gifted with all marks." 
Hearing the words of Rāma, Lakshmana, of unmitigated prowess, 
invited all those Brāhmanas and approached Rāma. Seeing 
them, Rāma saluted them touching their feet. And the 
Brāhmanas too, beholding the irrepressible celestial, like 
Rāghava, welcomed him with blessings. Thereupon Rāma, 
with folded hands, asked of those leading twice-born ones, 
questions regarding the Aswamedha sacrifice. And hearing 
the words of Rāma, they, too, saluting the deity Rudra, began 
to speak highly of the ceremony of horse-sacrifice. And 
being informed from the Brāhmanas of many unheard of 
virtues of Ashwamedha, Rāma was greatly delighted. And 
according to their desire he said to Lakshmana:—"O thou 
having long arms, do thou soon send an emissary to the 
high-souled Sugriva, communicating unto him 'Do thou 
come here to enjoy festivities in the company of all those 
highly powerful monkeys and bears, under thee; may good 
betide thee.' See that Bhibhishana of unequalled prowess, 
the king of Rākshasas, encircled by his followers, coursing 
at will, may be present at the horse sacrifice. Let the great 
kings, wishing my welfare with their followers, be present 
at the sacrifice. O Lakshmana, do thou also invite carefully, 
for witnessing the ceremony, other pious foreign kings who are 
friendly unto me. O thou having long arms, do thou also 
invite the Rishis, having asceticism for their wealth and 
other pious Brāhmanas living in various provinces. Do thou 
also invite actors and songsters. Do thou order that a 
spacious, sacrificial ground may be made on the banks of the 
river Gomoti in the Naimisha forest. O thou having long 
arms, that part of the country is best suited and holy. And 
let ceremonies, invoking peace, be celebrated everywhere. 
O thou conversant with piety, do thou soon invite hundreds 
of subjects, so that they all, having witnessed the ceremony 
in the Naimisha forest, may return delighted and honored. 
O thou having long arms, let Bharata go before with a 
million of beasts carrying rice, sessamun seed, Kidneybean, 
Chickpea, pulse, Masha (a sort of Kidney bean) salt, oil, 
clarified butter and a hundred koti of silver and golden coins. 
Let merchants, to set up shops on the way, actors, dancers, 
cooks, and many youthful females follow Bharata. Let 
soldiers go before him. And let the highly illustrious Bharata, 
with children, old men, Brāhmanas, citizens, servants, cashiers, 
mothers, wives and the golden image of my wife to be 
initiated at the sacrifice, go before." According to the 
command of Rāma, Bharata, with Satrughna, made arrangements 
for highly valuable quarters, food, drink and clothes. And the
highly powerful monkeys with Sugriva and Brāhmanas 
engaged in the work of distribution. And Bibhishana 
surrounded by various Rakshas and females, engaged in 
service of the high-souled Rishis intent on hard penances.

SECTION CV. 
```````````

Having speedily despatched before all articles of
sacrifice, Bharata's elder brother Rāma set free a black horse, 
gifted with all marks and worthy of the sacrifice and placed
Lakshmana with Rittwigas in charge of it. Thereupon the 
mighty-armed Kākuthstha, in the company of his soldiers, 
proceeded to the Naimisha forest and beholding the 
wonderful sacrificial ground attained to an excess of delight 
and said:—"It has become highly charming." And while 
he remained in the Naimisha forest, all the kings sent him 
presents and Rāma also made returns. And diverse food, 
drink and clothes were offered to the kings when they 
arrived there with profuse presents. Bharata, with Satrughna, 
engaged in attending upon the kings. The high-souled 
monkeys, with Sugriva, being self-controlled engaged in 
attending upon the Brāhmanas. Bibhishana, in the company 
of many Rākshasas, with a collected mind, began to serve 
the Rishis, having asceticism for their wealth. And the 
highly powerful Rāma, the foremost of men, set aside 
valuable houses for the accomodation of the high-souled 
kings. Under these proper arrangements the horse-sacrifice 
commenced. Lakshmana engaged in looking after the 
sacrificial horse. In this wise Rāma, a lion amongst the 
kings, undertook the celebration of the horse-sacrifice. And 
in that Ashwamedha of Rāma presents were given unto 
people as long as they were not satisfied. There was no 
other sound audible at that time save that of "Give! Give!!" 
In sooth at the horse-sacrifice of the high-souled Rāma, to 
their fullest satisfaction, sweets and other things were 
distributed unto people. Indeed before words came out from 
the lips of the beggars, monkeys and Rākshasas satisfied 
them with gifts. And all the ascetics living for ever 
and having asceticism for wealth that were present there, 
could not think of any other sacrifice, accompanied by so 
profuse presents, they had seen before. In that sacrifice, 
those, who wished for gold, obtained it, those who wished for 
property got it and those, who longed for jewels, received 
them. In this wise before all, enough of gold, jewels, and 
clothes were given away. The ascetics said:—"We have 
never seen before a sacrifice like this, Indra's, Soma's, 
Yama's or Varuna's." And being present everywhere the 
Rākshasas and Vānaras gave away enough of riches and 
clothes even unto them who did not want. And though this 
sacrifice, gifted with all marks, of Rāma, a lion among kings, 
continued for a year still his accumulated treasure was not 
exhausted, but rather was increased. 

SECTION CVI. 
````````````

That sacrifice, the like of which was never seen before, 
having been undertaken the illustrious ascetic Vālmiki, with 
his disciples, came there. And beholding this wonderful 
sacrifice resembling that of the celestials, his followers, the 
Rishis, made charming cottages in a solitary corner and at no 
distance. Inside the highly charming cottage of Vālmiki they 
placed his picturesque car full of fruits and roots. Thereupon 
Vālmiki said to his disciples, Lava and Kusa:—"Do ye 
carefully and delightedly sing the whole of Rāmāyana in the 
highly holy hermitages, of the Rishis, in the homes where 
perpetual fire is kept up by the Brāhmanas, in streets and 
palaces, at the gate of Rāma's house, in the sacrificial arena 
and before all Ritwigas. And eating all those sweet fruits 
that are on the summit of the mountain near our hermitage, 
do ye engage in chanting the sweet Rāmāyana. If you
begin singing after taking all those sweet fruits you 
not experience exhaustion in singing nor you shall 
measure. If Rāma, the lord of earth, invites you to sing
the Rāmāyana, you may fearlessly sing it there in due 
and measures before the assembled ascetics. During the 
day do ye sing, in your sweet voice, twenty sections out of
many I have laid in the Rāmāyana consisting of many
slokas. Do not cherish the least longing for riches, 
what avail is wealth unto ascetics living perpetually on fruits
and roots? If Rāma asks you about your father you may
say, 'We are both disciples of the high souled Vālmiki.' 
O Kusa and Lava, in your proper mood do you sing the
sweet song with charming Murchanā accompanied by the 
sweet notes of Vina. Before you begin with the song, 
without disregarding the king, do you bow unto him reverentially. 
Morally the king is the father of all. Do you therefore 
both, delightedly and with a collected mind, early in the 
morning, sing the theme in a sweet voice and accompanied 
by the music of the stringed instrument." Having in this 
wise given counsels, the highly generous and great ascetic 
Vālmiki, son of Pracheta, became silent. Being thus 
commanded by the ascetic, Janakis' sons, Lava and Kusa, the 
slayers of enemies, issued out therefrom saying. "So we 
shall do." Like unto the two Aswins following the moral 
precepts of Sukra, the two princes, placing those wonderful 
counsels of Vālmiki in their minds, spent the night with a 
heart stricken with curiosity. 

SECTION CVII. 
`````````````

Thereupon the night being over, having bathed and 
performed the Homa, both Lava and Kusa, in consonance with 
Rishi's command, began the song. That song was composed 
by the first preceptor (Vālmiki) never heard of before, consisting 
of sounds originating from six places, containing all metres, 
many proofs and set in accompaniment with the music of a 
stringed instrument. Hearing such a song from the boys 
Rāma was striken with curiosity. Thereupon taking leave 
from business for some time and inviting the great ascetic 
Vālmiki, kings, learned men, persons well-versed in Nyaya, 
Puranas and science of words, all old men, twice-born ones, 
those conversant with the signs of music, Brāhmanas desirous 
of hearing the Rāmāyana, persons deep read in palmistry, 
Gandharvas, citizens, all those who have mastered the use 
of words, letters and Samasas, those who have studied well 
metres, those well informed in the science of music, those 
well-versed in astronomy, those who are well up in the 
knowledge of rites and ceremonies, those expert in the 
patch of business, logicians whose fame has spread far and 
wide, those well-versed in reasonings and arguments, poets, 
historians, Vedic Brāhmanas, painters, and songsters Rāma 
requested Lava and Kusa lovingly to sing the song before the 
assembly. The audience being seated there and engaged in 
conversation with one another those two Muni boys began 
with the song enhancing the delight of all. Wondrous and 
charming was their song and the audience were not by any 
means satiated with the hearing thereof. Greatly delighted 
the highly effulgent ascetics and kings again and again 
looked towards them as if drinking them up with their eyes. 
And they all attentively said to one another—“Both of them 
take after Rāma, like unto a bubble resembling the one it 
rises from. There would not have been perceived the least 
difference between them and Rāma had they not been 
clothed in bark and used clotted hair.” The citizens and 
villagers speaking thus with one another Kusa and Lava 
chanted twenty sections beginning from the first, pointed 
out by Nārada. Having heard up to twentieth section, 
Rāma, fond of his brothers, said to Lakshmana in the 
afternoon. “O Kākutstha, do thou soon confer upon these two 
high-souled ones eighteen thousand gold coins and all other 
things they wish for.” Thereupon when Lakshmana 
addressed himself in no time to give them gold coins separately 
Kusa and Lava, not accepting them and surprisingly 
said:—“We are dwellers of a forest, living upon roots and 
fruits—what shall we do with them (coins)? Therefore living in 
the forest what shall we do with the gold?” Hearing those 
words Rāma and the audience were greatly worked up with 
curiosity and surprise. Thereupon being anxious to learn 
of the origin of the poem, the highly effulgent Rāma asked 
the two Muni boys, saying. "What is the proof of the story 
of this poem? How great is his fame who has composed it? 
What leading ascetic is the author of this great poem?" 
Rāma having thus asked them those two Muni boys 
said:—"The illustrious Vālmiki is the author of this poem. He has 
described in this poem thine endless story. He has of late 
come to thy sacrifice. The great ascetic Vālmiki has 
composed this poem consisting of a hundred stories and twenty 
four thousand slokas. O king, that high-minded ascetic is 
our preceptor. He has described thy actions in six books 
beginning with the first consisting of five hundred sections. 
All good actions performed by thee since thy birth have been 
recorded in this, O mighty car-warrior, O king, if thou dost 
wish to hear the whole of it, do thou, at thy leisure, hear it 
delightedly in the company of thy younger brothers." 
Saying "So it shall be," Rāma bade them adieu and they too, 
delighted, repaired to where Vālmiki, the foremost of Munis 
was. Thereupon having heard that charming song in the 
company of ascetics and kings the high-minded Rāma repaired 
to the place of business. He heard the Rāmāyana sung by 
Kusa and Lava, gifted with musical characteristics, consisting 
of sections, vowels, and consonant and enchanted in 
accompaniment with the music of a stringed instrument. 

SECTION CVIII. 
``````````````

Rāma heard that highly sacred theme for many long 
days in the company of ascetics, kings and Vanaras. And 
understanding from the story that Kusa and Lava were Jānaki’s 
sons, Rāma mentioning her name said before the 
assembly:—"Send a good emissary unto the illustrious 
Vālmiki and let him communicate unto the ascetics that if 
Jānaki is sinless and has lead a pure life in the forest; let 
her give proof of purity by the great ascetic’s permission. 
Let the emissaries learn well the intention of the ascetic in 
this and if Sitā is at heart willing to bring in proofs. To 
uphold her as well as mine purity, let Maithili, the daughter 
of Jānaka, swear before the assembly." Hearing those 
wonderful words of Rāma, the emissaries speedily went to 
Vālmiki and saluting the high-souled (ascetic) burning 
in his effulgence and of incomparable lustre, communicated 
unto him, in sweet words all what Rāma had said. Hearing 
the words of the messengers and understanding Rāma’s 
intention the ascetic said:—"What Rāma has said 
shall be satisfied. May good betide you. Husband 
is the greatest god for women. So Sitā shall carry out 
his behests." The great ascetic having said this, the highly 
powerful emissaries, approaching Rāma, communicated unto 
him what the Muni had said. Hearing the words of the 
high-souled Vālmiki, Rāma was greatly delighted. Having 
addressed the assembled Rishis and kings he said:—"The 
Rishis with their disciples, and the kings with their followers 
and all others willing shall see Sitā swear here." Hearing 
the words of the high-souled Rāma, all the high-souled 
Rishis began to speak of him in high terms and said: "O 
foremost of men, such an action becomes thee not any one 
else." Thereupon having settled that Sitā would swear 
next day, Rāma, the slayer of enemies, dismissed them all. 
And having made arrangements that Sitā would go through 
the trial next day, the high-minded, generous king Rāma 
bade adieu unto all kings and Rishis. 

SECTION CIX. 
````````````

Next morning Rāma, being present in the sacrificial 
ground and having sent for the Rishis, Vasishtha, Vamadeva 
Javali, Kashyapa, Viswamitra, carrying on penances for a
long time, Durvasa, Pulastya of hard austerities, Salastri, 
Vargava, Markandaya living long, the highly illustrious 
Madgalya, Gargya, Chyavana, Satananda, conversant with 
religions, effulgent Varadwāyā, Agnis' son Vasuprava, Nārada, 
Parvata, the great Gautama and other ascetics of firm vows, 
assembled with minds possessed by curiosity. The highly 
powerful Rākshasas and monkeys also came there out of 
curiosity. Besides thousands and thousands of Kshatryas, 
Vaisyas, Sudras and Brahmans of firm penances, also hailed 
there from various parts to witness Sitā's trial. Having 
arrived there they all sat down motionless like mountains. 
Thereupon, Vālmiki, the foremost of ascetics, speedily came 
there accompanied by Sitā. With her face downwards, folded 
palms, eyes full of tears and meditating upon Rāma in her 
mind, Sitā, following the Rishi, came before the assembly. 
There arose a great uproar of eulogy from the assembly when 
they saw Sitā following Vālmiki like unto Sruti following 
Brahmā. Thereupon members, stricken with sorrow, made 
a tumultuous sound. Amongst the visitors some praised 
Rāma, some praised Sitā and others eulogised both of them. 
Thereupon having entered that huge assemblage in company 
of Sitā, the great ascetic Vālmiki addressed Rāma, 
saying:—"O son of Daçaratha, in fear of calumny, thou didst renounce 
her near my hermitage, albeit Sitā is pure and follows the 
ways of morality. O Rāma of firm vows, thou art afraid of 
the censure of the people. Sitā has becoming willing to 
give testimony (of her purity) for removing the calumny of
the public; do thou mercifully give her permission in this.
I tell you the truth, O Rāma, that these irrepressible twin 
brothers are your sons, O descendant of Raghu. I am 
the tenth son of Pracheta, so, far from speaking untruth 
it does not even spring up in my mind. I therefore 
know the truth that these twins are thy sons. I have 
performed austere penances for many thousand years; I now 
swear before thee, that if this Maithili is found touched 
by any sin I shall not reap the fruit of my ascetic observances 
extending over many thousand years. I have never 
perpetrated before a crime, either in my mind, body, or speech. 
If Maithili is found divested of sin I may then partake of 
the fruits of piety. O descendant of Raghu, finding Sitā
pure in mind and five elements of body I took her near the 
spring in the forest. Besides this Sitā, of pure ways, divested 
of sins and ever considering her husband as deity, shall give 
testimony this day. Thou hast been afraid of the public 
calumny. O son of a king, thy mind being possessed by the 
fear of public scandal, thou didst renounce this Sitā of a pure 
character and always regarding her husband as a god; I
came to know this by virtue of my discriminative knowledge."

SECTION CX. 
```````````

After the great Rishi Vālmiki had said this, Rāma, on 
beholding the daughter of Janaka resembling a celestial, in 
the midst of the assembly, with folded hands, said:—"O 
great one, thou art conversant with piety. By thy words 
shorn of sin, I have been convinced that Jānaki is of pure 
ways. Still, O Brahman, what thou hast commanded shall 
be carried out; let Sitā produce testimony of the purity of 
her character. Because Vaidehi formerly underwent a trial 
in the city of Lanka before the celestials I brought her home. 
O Brahman, vilification of the people is very powerful. 
Although I know that Jānaki has not been touched by any 
sin still I have renounced her. Do thou therefore forgive 
me. I know that these twin brothers Kusa and Lava are 
my sons. Yet if Jānaki gives evidence of her own purity 
before the assembly I shall be greatly satisfied." Being 
apprised of Rāma’s intention as to Sitā’s trial the celestials 
all came there on the occasion. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, 
Viswadevas, Maruts, Sadhyas, Siddhas, Nagas and Rishis 
placing Brahmā before them, all came there. And beholding 
the celestials and Rishis assembled there Rāma again said to 
Vālmiki:—"O foremost of Munis, the words of the 
high-souled Rishis, are divested of sin; therefore on thy words 
only I shall consider Sitā as having pure ways. Still all have 
come here being anxious to witness Sitā’s trial. I shall 
therefore be greatly delighted if Jānaki gives in before them 
any testimony of her pure character." As soon as those 
words were uttered, sweet, fragrant, cold air, the witness of 
virtue and vice, blowing mildly, excited the joy of the 
assembly. People, hailing from various countries, with all attention 
began to witness this wondrous and unthought of event. 
In the golden age only the celestial wind used to blow—and 
it now blew even in the Treta Yuga and forsooth it was a 
matter of exceeding surprise. Thereupon beholding all 
people assembled there, Janaka's daughter, wearing a red 
cloth, with her face and looks downwards and folded palms 
said:—"I have never thought of any other person in my 
mind but Rāma; by the strength of this virtue let the 
goddess Vasundharā give me room. I have always with my 
mind, body and words prayed for Rāma’s well-being and by 
virtue hereof may the goddess Vasundharā give me room 
in her womb." As soon as Sitā swore in this wise a 
wonderful incident took place. From inside the earth a celestial 
and excellent throne rose up. It was carried on head by the 
Nāgas of unmitigated prowess, having celestial persons and 
adorned with celestial jewels and ornaments. Having 
stretched out her arms and taken Maithili, the goddess earth 
welcomed her and placed her on the throne. And while 
seated on the throne she was entering the earth, she was 
covered with the continued showers of celestial flowers. 
Eulogising her at that time, the celestials said "Oh! highly 
praiseworthy is thy conduct, O Sitā." Being present in the 
welkin and beholding Sitā enter into the Earth, the celestials 
again and again eulogised her in various words. The Rishis, 
kings and other leading men present in the sacrificial arena 
repeatedly expressed their surprise. Beholding Sitā's censure 
thus removed all animals, animate or inanimate, either on 
earth or in the sky, were greatly delighted. Some cried aloud 
in joy, some remained silent, and some motionless espied 
Rāma or Sitā. In this wise beholding Sitā's entrance into 
the Earth the ascetics were greatly delighted. They all 
attaining to the same state of mind, the whole universe, for 
a moment, was possessed with the state of equality. 

SECTION CXI. 
````````````

Sitā having entered Rasātala, all the monkeys and 
Rishis repeatedly eulogised her before Rāma. Stricken with 
sorrow and grief and lowering down his head, Rāma, with 
eyes full of tears, face downwards, and a dejected mind, sat 
down. And being possessed by grief and anger and shedding 
tears he wept for some time and then said:—"My mind is 
about to be possessed by grief, which I had never experienced 
before, for in the very presence of mine the graceful Jānaki, 
like Lakshmi herself, hath disappeared from view. Formerly, 
in my absence, Jānaki was once carried away into the city 
of Lankā, on the other side of the great ocean and I brought 
her back; what wonder it is that I shall get her back from 
Patāla? O goddess Vasudha, do thou soon bring Sitā in 
my view, or else, worked up with ire I shall give thee the 
fruits of thy negligence. Thou art my mother-in-law, since 
the royal saint Janaka obtained Sitā from thy womb while 
cultivating thee with plough share. Do thou therefore bring 
back my Sitā or give me a region of the celestials, I wish to 
live with Sitā. I am beside myself for her: do thou therefore 
bring back Sitā. If thou dost not render back Sitā unto me 
O Vasudha, I shall deluge the earth with waters, having 
assailed, destroyed and drowned into water thy huge 
compass with mountains and forests." Rāma, having given vent 
to those accents under the influence of ire, the patriarch 
Brahmā, with the consent of the celestials, said:—"O Rāma 
of firm vows, O slayer of enemies, thou shouldst not grieve 
thus. Recollect thy former state of Vishnu and the counsels. 
I would not have reminded thee of this secret but for the 
present necessity. Do thou now once more remember thy 
birth from Vishnu. By nature, Sitā is pure, chaste and ever 
dependent upon thee. And by virtue of her ascetic 
dependance upon thee she has gone to the region of Nāgas. Thou 
shalt again meet her in heaven. Hear, what I communicate unto 
thee before the assembly. Thou shalt be informed of 
everything by listening to this excellent poem describing thy own 
actions, O hero. Vālmiki has described herein all miseries and 
joys thou hast experienced since thy birth and what shall 
happen in future after Sitā's entrance into Patala. O Rāma, 
this first epic poem, Rāmayan, has been composed describing 
thy works. None but thee is worthy of the fame of this 
poem. O Rāghava, O highly illustrious one, do thou hear with 
the Rishis, Uttarakandam, the last portion of this poem. O 
descendant of Raghu, this is not worthy of being heard by any 
but those who art the foremost of the royal saints." Having 
said this, the deity Brahmā, the lord of the three worlds, with 
other deities, repaired to the region of immortals. The 
high-souled and the highly effulgent ascetics, living in Brahmā's 
region, who were present in the assembly, obtaining Brahmā's 
permission, waited there, to hear Rāma's future career in the 
Uttarakandam. Hearing the words of the great Patriarch 
instinct with well-being, the highly effulgent Rāma said to 
Vālmiki:—"O illustrious sir, the Rishis living in Brahmā's 
region have grown desirous of hearing my future history. 
So let it be taken up next morning." Having thus settled 
and taken with him Kusa and Lava and sent away the 
assembled people he entered his palace and spent the night 
mourning for Sitā. 

SECTION CXII. 
`````````````

The night being over and having invited the leading 
ascetics, Rāma told his sons to sing the poem fearlessly. 
Thereupon the high-souled Rishis having taken their seats 
Kusa and Lava began the last portion of the Uttarakāndam. 
Sitā having entered Patala by the strength of her vow, and 
the sacrifice having terminated, Rāma grew poorly in spirit. 
In Jānaki’s absence the whole world appeared to him as 
blank. Now being overwhelmed with grief he lost all mental 
peace. Having conferred various gifts upon the kings, 
Rākshasas, monkeys, and leading Brāhmanas, Rāma sent them 
away and meditating upon Sitā’s absence entered Ayodhyā. 
And from the time of Sitā’s entering into Patala he did 
not take any other spouse. And having made a golden image 
of Sitā he engaged in the performance of various sacrifices. 
In this wise for thousand years he celebrated many 
Horse-sacrifices, many Bajpeyas with profuse gold, Agnisomas, 
Atirātras, numberless Gomedhas and various other sacrifices, 
Rāma being engaged in governing the kingdom and 
performing many pious rites long time passed away. And 
being under his subjection, bears, monkeys, Rākshasas and 
kings always afforded delight unto him. On account of 
showers in proper time there was enough of food in his 
kingdom. The quarters were pure and delightful. The 
citizens and villagers were happy and healthy. None 
met with premature death. In fact, in his regime all 
calamities were removed. Thereupon after many years, the 
illustrious Kausalya, Rāma’s mother, surrounded by her sons 
and grand-sons, breathed her last. Performing many 
pious observances Kakeyi followed her and obtained peace 
in the land of immortals. Those noble ladies, being united 
with the king Daçaratha, in heaven, were greatly delighted 
and obtained all virtues. Besides, having worshipped the 
deities and manes on the occasion of his father’s *Srādha* 
ceremony the high-souled Rāma distributed many jewels 
and engaged in the performance of a very difficult sacrifice. 
In this wise having performed many sacrifices and multiplied 
pieties he spent many thousand years in happiness. 

SECTION CXIII. 
``````````````

Once on a time Yudhajit, the king of Kekaya, sent 
unto the high-souled Rāma, Gargya—son of his own 
preceptor Angeras—a Brāhmin saint of unmitigated prowess; 
and with him he sent, as tokens of affections, gifts of ten 
thousand horses, numberless blankets, various jewels, diverse 
clothes and well washed coverlets. Hearing of the arrival 
of the great saint Gargya with above valuable presents sent 
by his material uncle Yudhajit, the intelligent Rāma, with 
his brothers, proceeded about a Krosa to receive him and 
adored him particularly likely unto the lord of celestials 
honoring Vrihaspati. Having thus welcomed that foremost 
of Rishis and accepted the valuable presents sent by his 
maternal uncle he asked the ascetic about his welfare in every 
thing. Thereupon the great Rishi being seated, he 
said:—"Thou art the foremost of those skilled in the art of speech 
like the very preceptor of the celestials. Since thine own self 
hath come here my uncle must have commissioned thee with 
a very important message." Hearing those words of Rāma 
the great saint communicated unto him the object of his 
coming, saying.—"O thou having long arms, if thou dost 
like, hear what loving words thy maternal uncle Yudhajit, 
the foremost of men, has said. The Gandharvas, holding 
weapons and expert in warfare, guard that beautiful province 
abounding in fruits and roots on the banks of the river 
Sindhu. O hero, those Gandharvas are Sailuskā's sons—highly 
powerful and three kotis in number. Having hoisted thy 
flag of victory and conquered that highly picturesque city 
of Gandharvas do thou include that kingdom within thine 
well-established territories. None can enter there. O thou 
having long arms, I do not request thee for any harm of thine. 
Let that highly charming country be liked by thee." Hearing 
the words of the maternal uncle communicated by the great 
saint, Rāma, with delight, said:—"What you have commanded 
shall be satisfied." Saying this he looked towards Bharta 
and delightedly and with folded hands said to the Rishi "O
Brahmarshi, these two princes are Bharata's sons and their 
names are Taksha and Pushkala. Being well protected by 
uncle Yudhajit and preceded by Bharata with army and
followers they shall subjugate the Gandharvas and divide 
the kingdom between them. Having established two 
kingdoms and installed his two sons there Bharata, the foremost 
of the pious, shall come back to me." 

Having thus said to the Brahmarshi, Rāma commanded 
Bharata and welcomed the two princes. Thereupon under 
the auspices of favourable stars, having placed Gargya before 
them, Bharata with the princes and army, issued out of the 
city of Ayodhyā. And Rāma’s army unconquerable even 
by the celestials went on for a month, from the city like a 
celestial host under the command of Indra. Animals, living 
upon flesh and huge-bodied Rākshasas longing for blood 
followed Bharata. Besides many thousand birds, moving 
in the sky, lions, tigers and boars went before the army. 
The army, consisting of delighted and healthy subjects 
spending half a month in the way, arrived at the Kekaya kingdom 
in good health. 

SECTION ICXIV. 
``````````````

Hearing of the arrival of the Bharata with the army
Gargya and Yudhajit, the king of Kekayas, were greatly 
delighted. And with a huge army they speedily went out for 
conquering the Gandharvas. Thereupon the highly 
powerful and light-armed Bharata and Yudhajit, with the soldiers 
and followers, arrived at the city of Gandharvas. Having 
heard of the coming of Bharata the highly powerful 
Gandharvas gathered round and sent up leonine roars. 
Thereupon began the battle capable of making down erect and 
continued for a week. On neither side there was victory 
or defeat. On all sides there flowed streams of blood 
and there were afloat human bodies. Daggers, Saktis and 
bows were like the banks of the river. Thereupon enraged 
Bharata, Rāma's younger brother, discharged a dreadful 
arrow named Sangharata resembling the fire of dissolution 
against Gandharvas. Having bound them all with the noose 
of death and sundered them with Sangharata, Bharata 
despatched all the Gandharvas to the abode of death. Even 
the celestials could not recollect if such a dreadful encounter 
had happened before. In a moment the huge Gandharva 
host was slain. After the destruction of the Gandharvas, 
Kaikeyi's son Bharata set up two excellent and 
prosperous cities in the province of Gandharva. And he placed 
Taksha in Takshasila and Pushkala in Pushkalabati. 
Both the cities were filled with profuse riches and jewels 
and covered with various gardens. As for many 
ornaments both of them as if vied with one another. By just 
purchases and sales, and by the conduct of the people 
the cities grew highly charming. Both of them were filled 
with gardens and conveyances. Rows of shops were well 
arranged by the streets in both the cities. Both of them 
were adorned with many excellent fancy articles, picturesque 
houses, charming palaces and many beautiful and high Tāla, 
Tamāla, Tilaka and Vakula trees. Having reared up those 
two cities within five years, Rāma's younger brother, the 
mighty armed Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, returned to Ayodhyā. 
And like unto Vāsava saluting Brahmā he adored the 
high-souled Rāghava the very personation of virtue and 
communicated unto him duly the destruction of the 
Gandharvas and the establishment of the two cities. And 
hearing the words of Bharata, Rāma attained to an excess of 
delight. 

SECTION CXV.
````````````

Hearing the wonderful words of Bharata both Rāma 
and Lakshmana were greatly delighted. And then Rāma 
said to Lakshmana:—"O Saumitri, thy two sons, Angada 
and Chandraketu are well-versed in religions, perfectly 
qualified in governing the kingdom and highly powerful. 
I shall therefore install them on throne. O gentle one, do 
thou find out such a country where these two skillful archers 
may unobstructed roam about. And where if a kingdom is 
established it might not disturb the peace and happiness of 
other kings." Rāma, having finished his speech Bharata 
replied:—"The country of Karupada is highly picturesque 
and freed from all thorns. Let the city for Angada be 
established there. And let the beautiful country of 
Chandradyuti be the kingdom of Chandraketu." Rāma approved of 
the words of Bharata and having brought the country of 
Karupada under his subjection gave it to Angada. He 
reared a beautiful and well-protected city for Angada. 
And in the country of Mallya he reared a city for 
Chandraketu, named Chandrakānti highly picturesque and 
like unto the city of celestials. Thereupon greatly 
delighted Rāma, irrepressible in battle, Lakshmana and 
Bharata, having performed the ceremony of installation 
ordered them to go their respective cities. Angada started 
towards the West and Chandraketu towards the North. 
Sumitra's son Lakshmana went with Angada and Bharata 
accompanied Chandraketu. Having spent a year in 
Angada's city and finding his son well established in the 
kingdom Lakshmana returned to Ayodhyā. And Bharata, 
according to his desire, having spent more than a year in the 
city of Chandrakānti, came back to Ayodhyā and saluted 
Rāma's feet. The pious Lakshmana and Bharata—both the 
brothers, were greatly attached unto Rāma; and though they 
spent their days in another place they did not experience 
any pain in consequence of separation from their sons. 
Observing all virtues in this way, Rāma, the foremost of 
the pious, Bharata and Lakshmana governed the subjects 
for ten thousand years. Having spent their days in the 
city of Ayodhyā, the very city of virtue, the three brothers, 
appearing graceful like the burning fire receiving oblations 
in a great sacrifice, attained to joy in the fullness of time. 

SECTION CXVI.
`````````````

In this wise the virtuous Rāma having spent some time at
Kāla, assuming the shape of an ascetic, arrived at the 
palace gate. And beholding the intelligent Lakshmana at 
the door he said: "Do thou communicate (unto Rāma) 
that for some important business I have come here. I am 
the messenger of the great saint Atibala of incomparable 
effulgence. O thou of great strength, for a particular 
business, I have come here to see Rāma." Hearing the words of 
the great saint, Saumitri speedily went to Rāghava and 
communicated unto him the arrival of the ascetic, 
saying:—"O thou of great effulgence, observing the royal duties,
mayst thou acquire victory in both the worlds; one 
ambassador radiant like the sun by virtue of his asceticism, has 
come here to visit thee." Hearing the words of Lakshmana 
Rāma said:—"Do thou speedily bring here the highly 
effulgent ascetic bringing in a message." Thereupon 
saying "So be it," Saumitri conducted the effulgent ascetic unto 
Rāma's house. And having approached Rāma the foremost 
of Raghus, the ascetic, burning in his own energy, said to him, 
in sweet accents:—"O great king, may prosperity crown 
thee." And having welcomed him with water and Argya 
the highly effulgent Rāma asked him about his well-being. 
Being asked by Rāma as to his welfare, that foremost of 
ascetics, skilled in the art of speech, sat on a golden seat. 
Thereupon welcoming him Rāma said:—"Do thou 
communicate unto me his words by whom thou hast been sent." 
Being thus addressed by Rāma, a lion amongst kings, the 
ascetic said:—"If dost thou wish to bring about the 
well-being of the celestials, my earnest desire is that we 
may talk over it in a solitary; place. And if thou hast any 
regard for the words of that foremost of ascetics, do thou 
so order that whoever shall hear or see us, when we shall 
converse in a solitary place, shall be slain by thee." 
Thereupon Rāma promised that it should be done and said to 
Lakshmana:—"O thou having long arms, sending away the 
warder do thou wait at the gate. When I shall talk with 
this ascetic in this solitary room whoever, shall hear or 
see us, shall be slain by me." Having thus placed 
Lakshmana at the gate Rāma said to that Rishi:—"O great 
saint, tell me what he has communicated unto thee. O 
Muni, what is thy intention and by what high-souled Rishi 
thou hast been sent here. Tell me all this without any fear. 
I have become anxious to hear it." 

SECTION CXVII.
``````````````

Thereupon the great saint said:—"Hear, O king, O 
thou gifted with great energy, for what I have come here. 
O thou of great strength, the great Patriarch has sent 
me to thee. O hero, I am thy son. Thou didst, in thy 
pristine birth, beget me on Māyā—I am Kāla, the 
destroyer of all. Lord Brahmā, the father of all creatures, has 
said that thou didst promise to preserve the three worlds. 
Formerly when having slain all animals by thy Māyā 
thou wert asleep in the waters of the mighty deep I was born. 
Thereafter thou didst create the huge-bodied Ananta, living 
in the waters as the king of serpents. Then thou didst 
create two highly powerful Asuras named Madhu and 
Kaithabha. At that time the bones of those two Asuras 
having been scattered far and wide this earth containing 
many mountains was named *Medini*. Having procreated 
me in thy lotus navel, dazzling in celestial brilliance 
thou didst employ me in the work of generation. I took the 
charge and procreated men; but finding no other means to 
preserve them I worshipped thee, the lord of the universe and 
said:—O lord, thou shouldst protect the creatures, for thou 
art my father and giver of energy and therefore irrepressible. 
Thereupon for concerting means for the preservation of 
creatures, thou didst renounce thy irrepressible shape and 
assume Vishnu form. And taking thy birth from Aditi's 
powerful son, thou wert engaged in enhancing the delight of 
my brothers. Thou didst use to protect the deities whenever 
they were assailed by any calamity. O lord of the universe, 
it is for that reason, on beholding the destruction of creatures 
thou wert born on earth to slay the Ten-necked demon. 
And at that time thou didst promise that thou wouldst live 
in the land of mortals for eleven thousand years. Thereupon 
thou didst assume a human form to carry out thine desire. 
Now that period is ripe and this is the proper time to inform 
thee of it. O great king, do thou wait in this land of mortals 
if dost thou wish to govern people for some time more.
And if dost thou wish to repair to the region of immortals, 
do thou again lord over the deities in thy Vishnu form and 
let them be freed from anxiety. O Hero, the Patriarch hath
sent this intelligence unto thee." Hearing those unequalled 
words of the Patriarch from the mouth of Kāla, the destroyer 
of all, Rāma smiling said:—"I have been greatly pleased 
and happy for thy coming here, O my son. I descended on 
earth to bring about the well-being of the three worlds. May 
good betide thee. I shall now repair to from where I have 
come here. I was thinking of this when thou didst come 
here. Therefore, I have no doubt in this. O lord of 
destruction, the immortals are dependent on me, so I shall be with 
them in all works. The Great Patriarch has said the truth." 

SECTION CXVIII.

While Rāma and Kāla were thus conversing with one 
another, the great ascetic Durvāsā arrived at the gate for 
seeing Rāma and approaching Lakshmana said:—"O 
Saumitri, do thou soon take me to Rāma; my time goes away, 
so do thou take me first." Hearing the words of the ascetic, 
Lakshmana, the slayer of enemies worshipping the feet of 
that high-souled one, said:—"O illustrious Sir, kindly 
mention thy business. What is thy object? Order me what I 
am to do. Rāma is engaged in some business so kindly 
wait here for some time." Hearing those words that 
foremost of Rishis, Durvāsā, impatient with rage, said with 
blood-red eyes:—"O Saumitri, if dost thou not go even 
this very moment and communicate unto Rāma my arrival, 
I shall impricate thee, Rāma, Bharata, Sutrughana, your 
sons and grand-sons. I shall curse also thy kingdom and 
cities. I cannot any longer restrain my growing ire." 
Hearing those dreadful and resolute words of the Rishi, 
Lakshmana thought within himself:—"My own destruction 
is far more desirable than that of all." Having thus 
resolved Lakshmana approached Rāma and communicated 
unto him the intelligence. Hearing the words of Lakshmana 
and having bade adieu unto Kāla, Rāma soon came out and 
saw Atri's son. And having saluted that great and powerful 
ascetic he with folded hands, said "What is thine business?" 
Hearing the words of Rāma, the highly powerful Durvāsā, 
the foremost of Munis, said. "Hear, O Rāma fond of virtue. 
For a thousand years I have carried on the vow of fasting. 
It has terminated to-day, so do thou give me food as much 
as possible." Hearing those words Rāma was greatly 
delighted and gave proper food unto that ascetic. And 
feasting on that nectar-like sweet food, Durvāsā, the foremost 
of Rishis, thanked Rāma and repaired to his own hermitage. 
Thereupon remembering the words of Kāla, Rāma was 
greatly sorry. And thinking of those dreadful words he 
was overwhelmed with grief. And with a poorly heart, and 
face downwards he remained silent for some time. 
Thereupon thinking of Kāla's words and determining that every 
calamity would befall him, that highly illustrious descendant, 
of Raghus, summoned patience. 

SECTION CXIX.
`````````````

Thereupon beholding Rāma with his head 
downwards and poorly like unto the moon possessed by Rāhu, 
Lakshmana, delightedly and with sweet words, said:—"Be 
not aggrieved for me, O thou having mighty arms. Such is 
the course of time; the movements of creatures are destined 
by their pristine actions, good or bad. O gentle one, do 
thou satisfy thy promise slaying me without any hesitation. 
O Kākuthstha, those, who cannot carry out their promises, 
repair to hell. O great king, if thou hast any love or 
affection for me, do thou satisfy thy promise by fearlessly slaying 
me." Hearing those words of Lakshmana Rāma's mind 
was greatly moved. Thereupon having invited his priests and 
ministers there he communicated unto them his promise and 
Durvāsā's arrival. Hearing it the ministers and priests 
remained silent. Thereupon Vasishtha, of unmitigated 
effulgence, said:—"O highly illustrious and mighty armed Rāma, 
I knew before by virtue of my asceticism, of this thy present 
destruction and separation from Lakshmana. Time is 
powerful; do not falsify thy promise. Promises not carried out 
bring on the destruction of virtue. And on the wane of 
virtue, forsooth, the three worlds, with celestials, saints, 
mobile and immobile creations, shall be destroyed. Therefore, 
O foremost of men, do thou protect, the universe by suffering 
separation from Lakshmana, in the interest of the preservation 
of the three worlds." All other ministers and priests agreed 
with Vasishtha's words. Thereupon hearing their moral 
counsels, Rāma said to Lakshmana before the 
assembly:—"O Lakshmana, it is not proper to act against morality, I do
therefore renounce thee; for the pious hold that destruction 
and renounciation are all the same." Rāma saying this, 
Lakshmana did not go to his own house, but with eyes full 
of tears specially repaired therefrom. Having reached the 
banks of Saraju and rinsed his mouth he stood there with 
folded palms. And having obstructed all passages he did not 
breathe any more. Lakshmana, the younger brother of 
Rāma, being thus engaged in penances, having obstructed his 
breath, Apsarās, Indra and other deities and Rishis showered 
flowers on him. Thereupon beyond the sight of men, 
having taken the highly powerful Lakshmana within his body,
the king of celestials entered his own city. Thereupon 
beholding Lakshmana, the fourth portion of Vishnu arrived at 
their city the celestials were greatly delighted and engaged 
in his worship. 

SECTION CXX. 
````````````

Having forsaken Lakshmana and being stricken with 
sorrow and grief Rāma said to his citizens and 
ministers:—"Having placed the pious and heroic Bharata on the throne 
of Ayodhyā, I shall to-day repair to woods. Do ye, 
without any delay collect there all articles of installation. I 
shall follow the way which has been wended by Lakshmana." 
Hearing the words of Rāghava, the subjects with their heads 
downwards remained motionless like so many dead bodies. 
Hearing Rāma's words Bharata was also stupified and 
speaking ill of the kingdom, said:—"O King, I swear by truth, that 
far from kingdom I do not wish to live in heaven even 
without thee: O King, of these two princes, Kusi and Lava do 
thou place Kusi in Kosala and Lava in North Kosala. And 
let quick-moving emissaries go to Satrughna and 
communicate unto him the intelligence of our going there." Hearing 
those words of Bharata and beholding the subjects stricken 
with sorrow having their heads downwards, Vasishtha 
said:—"Behold, O Rāma, the subjects have placed 
themselves on the ground. Do thou, therefore; apprised of their 
intention, satisfy their desire." Raising up the subjects 
according to the words of Vasishtha Rāma said:—"What 
good can I do for you!" Hearing Rāma's words they 
said:—"O King, we shall follow thee wherever thou shalt
go. If thou hast any love or affection for the citizens do 
thou permit them that they may follow thy good path with their 
wives and children. O lord, if thou dost not forsake us, let 
us all go wherever thou wilt,—be it a forest, an intractable 
tract, a river or an ocean. O great king, by this we shall be 
greatly delighted. We pray for this boon only. Our delight 
consists in following thee in everything." Observing such a 
firm devotion of the citizens Rāma agreed to that. 
Thereupon having gone through his duties he installed Kusi in 
the kingdom of Kosala and Lava in the northern country. 
Having thus installed the high-souled and heroic Kusi and 
Lava and conferred upon each of them thousand chariots, 
Ajuta Nāgas, Ajuta horses and various jewels and riches 
he established them in their respective kingdoms. Having 
thus settled the princes he despatched an emissary to 
Satrughna. 

SECTION CXXI. 
`````````````

Having been despatched by Rāma, quick-moving 
emissaries speedily arrived at Mathura. Continually travelling 
for three nights and days, they arrived there and 
communicated unto Satrughna the intelligence. Having informed 
him of the renouncing of Lakshmana, Rāma's promise and 
the following of the citizens they said:—"The intelligent 
Rāma has reared for Kusi the spacious city of Kusavati 
at the foot of the Vindhya range. The city of Sravanti 
has been reared for Lava, and the mighty car-warriors 
Rāma and Bharata, making Ayodhyā void of men, have 
addressed themselves for repairing to heaven." Having 
speedily communicated unto him this intelligence the 
emissaries took rest. Thereupon they asked Satrughna to 
proceed soon. Observing the dreadful destruction of his race, 
Satrughna sent for his subjects and priests and informed 
them of everything. He also communicated unto them his 
own destruction with his brothers. Thereupon the king 
Satrughna determined upon installing his two sons in the 
kingdom. Suvahu was placed on the throne of Mathura and 
Satrughati became the king of Vidisha. Having thus 
established Suvahu in Mathura, and Satrughati in Vidisha, the 
great hero Satrughna ascended his car and went to Ayodhyā. 
And there he saw the great Rāma, clothed in silk raiment 
burning like fire in the midst of the ascetics. Thereupon 
remembering his duty he saluted Rāma, conversant with 
piety and with folded hands said:—"I have placed my two 
sons on the throne of my kingdom. I have now resolved 
upon following thee, O King. O hero, do not command me 
otherwise. I pray only that I may not neglect thy 
command." Thereupon understanding the firm resolution of 
Satrughna, the descendant of Raghu agreed. Immediately 
after Rāma had said this, monkeys assuming shapes at will, 
bears, and Rakshas began to assemble there. Apprised 
of Rāma's determination of going to heaven, monkeys, born 
of the celestials, Rishis and Gandharvas taking Sugriva 
before them, came there to see Rāma. And they all 
said:—"O Rāma, O foremost of men, if thou dost repair to heaven 
forsaking us all, it will be hurling Yama's rod upon us." The 
highly powerful Sugriva too saluting Rāma said:—"O lord 
of men, having placed Angada on the throne I have come 
hither. I have determined upon following thee, O King." 
Hearing the words of monkeys, Rāma said that their desire 
would be fulfilled. He then said to Bibhishana the king of 
Rākshasas:—"As long as people shall breathe, O Bibhishana, 
O highly powerful lord of Rākshasas, thou shalt preserve 
thy body in Lankā. As long as the moon, the sun and the 
earth shall exist and as long as my story shall remain current, 
thy kingdom shall be in existence. Thou didst, out of 
friendship, carry out my behests and perform my works. Do 
thou piously govern thy subjects. I should not speak any 
thing else. What shall I say more unto thee, O highly 
powerful lord of Rākshasas. Worship Jagannath (the lord of 
the world), the presiding deity of the Ikshwāku race." 
Having thus addressed the king of Rākshasas always 
obeying Rāghava's command, Kākuthstha said to 
Hanumān:—"It is settled that thou shalt live forever, do thou, 
now observe thy promise. As long as my history shall run 
current in this world do thou at my command live happily." 
Being thus addressed by the high-souled Rāghava Hanumān 
attained to great delight and said:—"As long as the sacred 
theme shall pass current in this world I shall live here 
carrying out thy commands." Thereupon he said to the 
Jambhuvan, Brahmā's son, Mainda, Dwivida and five others 
in his company:—"As long as the Kali Yuga exists do 
ye all live." Having thus addressed them all Kākuthstha 
said to bears and monkeys, "Do ye come all with me." 

SECTION CXXII.
``````````````

After the night had expired the highly illustrious 
Rāma having a spacious breast and eyes like lotus petals said 
to the priest:—"Let the brilliant umbrellas Agnihotra, and 
Bājapeya go with the Brāhmanas before, which look well in 
the great road." Thereupon the highly effulgent Vasishtha 
arranged duly all the ceremonies necessary for going to the 
next world. Thereupon wearing a thin cloth, holding kusa 
grass by his fingers, and reciting Vedic hymns he proceeded 
to the banks of Saraju. Having given up all actions of
senses, and suffered the pains of going on foot he issued 
out of the city speechless like unto the burning sun. On 
his right hand side was the lotus-handed Sree, on his left 
hand side was the goddess Earth and before him was the 
power of destruction. Various arrows, huge bows, and 
daggers, assuming forms followed him. And also went with 
him the four Vedas in the shape of the Brāhmanas, the all 
protecting Gayatri, Omkāra and Vasatkāra. The high-souled 
Rishis and great Asuras followed the high-souled Rāma to 
the open gates of heaven. All the female servants, old and 
young, the damsels of the seraglio accompanied by servants 
having no manhood, Bharata and Lakshmana accompanied 
by their wives, followed him with Agnihotra. All those 
high-souled ones, assembled there with Agnihotra and 
followed Kākuthstha with their wives and children. The 
ministers and the servants, with their sons, beasts and friends, 
followed Rāma delightedly. Thereupon all the subjects 
healthy and delighted went after Rāghava, attracted by his 
accomplishments and cleansed of their sins. All the females 
and males, with their beasts, birds and friends, delightedly 
followed Rāghava. Bathed and delighted, all the monkeys, 
healthy and joyous following Rāma, created a continued tumult. 
There was none poorly, aggrieved or miserable—all of them 
appeared wonderfully happy and delighted. When Rāma 
issued out of the city, whoever came to see him followed him 
being desirous of going to heaven. Bears, monkeys and 
Rākshasas and all the citizens followed him with great 
devotion and collected minds. And all other animals, that 
were beyond the view of all in the city went after Rāghava 
proceeding to heaven. All creations mobile and immobile, 
whoever beheld Kākuthstha followed him. All beings in 
Ayodhyā, whoever breathe and are very minute, 
accompanied Rāma. 

SECTION CXXIII. 
```````````````

Having thus gone for more than a half Yojana, the 
descendant of Raghu espied Saraju of holy waters 
flowing towards the west. And having crossed that river of 
rising waves to some extent, Rāma, with his followers 
arrived at the place where he should give up his person. 
Thereupon at that moment, Brahmā, the grandfather of all 
encircled by all high-souled deities and with hundred kotis 
of celestial cars, arrived there where Kākuthstha had 
addressed himself to repair to heaven. The aerial way was 
full of lustre but its brilliance was increased the more 
by the native effulgence of the inhabitants of heavens, 
always performing pious actions. There blew the holy, 
fragrant and delightful winds and there fell profusely 
celestial flowers from the hands of the deities. The place 
was filled with the noise of hundreds of bugles sounded by 
Gandharvas and Apsarās. And then Rāma prepared 
himself to descend to the waters of Saraju. Thereupon the 
Patriarch gave vent to the following accents from the 
welkin:—“Come O Vishnu; may good betide thee; by our 
good fortune thou art coming here; O Rāghava hear—O 
thou having mighty arms, do thou enter here with thy 
brothers, resembling the celestials in brilliance in whatever 
form thou likest—either in that of the sky or in thy own 
Vishnu form. Thou art the refuge of the creatures—nobody 
knoweth thee. Thou art above the range of thought; great 
immortal and imperishable; nobody knoweth thee save 
Māyā, having wide eyes, thy former spouse. Do thou enter 
here thyself in whatever effulgent form thou likest.” Hearing 
the words of the Patriarch and determining everything 
the high-minded Rāma entered there bodily with his brothers 
in his Vishnu form. Thereupon all the celestials Sādhyas 
Marutas, headed by Indra and Agni worshipped that deity, 
Vishnu. So did all the celestial Rishis, Gandharvas, Apsarās, 
Suparnas, Nāgas, Yakhas, demons, Dānavas and Rākshasas. 
Thereupon eulogising him the celestials said:—"Our region 
is now freed from sins and all here have been delighted 
and all their desires have been fulfilled." Thereupon the 
highly effulgent Vishnu said to the Patriarch 
Brahmā:—"It behoveth thee, O thou of good vows, to allot to 
those people their proper regions. These illustrious ones 
have followed me out of love. They are worthy of my 
respect for they are my devotees and have renounced 
their persons for me." Hearing the words of Vishnu, the 
lord Brahmā, father of all creatures, said:—"All these 
people who have come here shall go to the region named 
Santanaka. This region is intended even for him, who 
though born in the most degraded state, thinks of all 
objects as Vishnu. There is no question about their attaining 
to this region who, out of devotion, have followed thee and 
renounced their persons. This region has all the attributes 
of the Brahmā region and is next to it. The monkeys and 
bears shall enter into their respective celestial forms. They 
shall enter into the deities from whom they had respectively 
originated. Sugriva shall enter into the Sun's region. And 
they shall obtain their respective fathers' forms among the 
celestials present." The lord of the deities having said this, 
all those who were present at the holy pilgrimage of *Gopratra*
descended into the waters of Saraju with eyes full of tears 
of joy. Having bathed there, given up their lives delightedly 
and renounced their human forms they ascended the celestial 
cars. And having obtained the waters of Saraju, hundreds 
of those that were born in the race of birds attained to the 
land of immortals obtaining the respective celestial forms 
(they had before). And in those celestial forms, they looked 
effulgent like the deities. And going to the waters of Saraju 
all objects, mobile and immobile, having bathed there, repaired 
to the excellent celestial region. Having renounced their 
bodies in the water thereof all the bears, monkeys, and 
Rakshasas attained to the land of deities. Having thus 
settled in heaven all those arrived there the father, of creatures 
with the deities, delighted and happy, repaired to the highest 
heaven. 

SECTION CXXIV. 
``````````````

This Story ends with the Uttara. It is held in reverence 
by Brahma, composed by Vālmiki and passes as the foremost 
of all under the name of the Rāmāyana. Thereupon as 
before, Vishnu, who compriseth the three worlds and all 
objects, mobile and immobile, again established himself as 
before in the land of immortals. Thereupon the celestials 
the Gandharvas, the great Rishis used to hear happily every 
day in heaven this poem of Rāmāyana. At the Sarādha 
ceremony the wise should chant this Rāmāyana sacred like 
the Vedas, removing sins and increasing life and prosperity. 
Reading even a single verse of this poem, one who hath no 
son, obtaineth him; one having no riches, gets by them—and 
people are freed from all sins. By reading even one sloka
people are freed from all sins which they commit every day. 
Clothes, cows, and gold should be conferred upon him who 
chants this poem, for he being pleased all the deities remain 
satisfied. Whoever reads this story of Rāmāyana, conferring 
a long life is honoured in this world along with his sons 
and grand-sons and as well as in the land of the dead. 
Whoever shall read this Rāmāyana either in the morning, noon, 
or evening, shall never be wearied. The picturesque city of 
Ayodhyā remained devoid of men for many long years but 
was again peopled under the regime of the King Rishava, 
Pracheta’s son Vālmiki composed this poem, conferring long 
life, together with the future story of the deity and the 
Uttara Kandam. Even Brahmā admitted this. 

THE END. 

.. pgfooter::
